


CHAPTER III--A STRANGE STORY


"Well, Mr. Jenks," began Tom, when he had descended to the garden, and
greeted the man who had acted so strangely on Earthquake Island, "this
is rather an odd time for a visit."

"I realize that, Tom Swift," was the answer, and the lad noticed that
the man spoke much more calmly than he had that evening at the jewelry
shop. "I realize that, but I have to be cautious in my movements."

"Why?"

"Because there are enemies on my track. If they thought I was seeking
aid to discover the secret of Phantom Mountain, my life might pay the
forfeit."

"Are you in earnest, Mr. Jenks?"

"I certainly am, and, while I must apologize for awakening you at this
unseemly hour, and for the mysterious nature of my visit, if you will
let me tell my story, you will see the need of secrecy."

"Oh, I don't mind being awakened," answered Tom, good-naturedly, "but
I will be frank with you, Mr. Jenks. I hardly can believe what you have
stated to me several times--that you know how diamonds can be made."

"I can prove it to you," was the quiet answer.

"Yes, I know. For centuries men have tried to discover the secret of
transmuting base metals into gold, and how to make diamonds by chemical
means. But they have all been failures."

"All except this process--the process used at Phantom Mountain,"
insisted the queer man. "Do you want to hear my story?"

"I have no objections."

"Then let me warn you," went on Mr. Jenks, "that if you do hear it, you
will be so fascinated by it that I am sure you will want to cast your
lot in with mine, and aid me to get my rights, and solve the mystery.
And I also want to warn you that if you do, there is a certain amount of
danger connected with it."

"I'm used to danger," answered Tom, quietly. "Let me hear your story.
But first explain how you came to come here, and why you acted so
strangely at the jewelry store."

"Willingly. I tried to attract your attention at the store, because I
saw that you were going to buy a diamond, and I didn't want you to."

"Why not?"

"Because I want to present you with a beautiful stone, that will answer
your purpose as well or better, than any one you could buy. That will
prove my story better than any amount of words or argument. But I could
not attract your attention without also attracting that of the jeweler.
He became suspicious, gave chase, and I thought it best to vanish. I
hope no one was made to suffer for what may have been my imprudence."

"No, the lad whom Mr. Track caught was let go. But how did you happen to
come to Shopton?"

"To see you. I got your address from the owner of the yacht Resolute. I
knew that if there was one person who could aid me to recover my rights,
it would be you, Tom Swift. Will you help me? Will you come with me to
discover the secret of Phantom Mountain? If we go, it will have to be in
an airship, for in no other way, I think, can we come upon the place, as
it is closely guarded. Will you come? I will pay you well."

"Perhaps I had better hear your story," said the young inventor. "But
first let me suggest that we move farther away from the house. My
father, or Mr. Jackson, or the housekeeper, may hear us talking, and it
may disturb them. Come with me to my private shop," and Tom led the way
to a small building where he did experimental work. He unlocked the door
with a key he carried, turned on the lights, which were run by a storage
battery, and motioned Mr. Jenks to a seat.

"Now I'll hear your story," said Tom.

"I'll make it as short as possible," went on the queer man. "To begin
with, it is now several years ago since a poorly dressed stranger
applied to me one night for money enough to get a meal and a bed to
sleep in. I was living in New York City at the time, and this was
midnight, as I was returning home from my club.

"I was touched by the man's appearance, and gave him some money. He
asked for my card, saying he would repay me some day. I gave it to him,
little thinking I would hear from the man again. But I did. He called
at my apartments about a week later, saying he had secured work as an
expert setter of diamonds, and wanted to repay me. I did not want to
take his money, but the fact that such a sorry looking specimen of
manhood as he had been when I aided him, was an expert handler of gems
interested me. I talked with the man, and he made a curious statement.

"This man, who gave his name as Enos Folwell, said he knew a place where
diamonds could be made, partly in a scientific manner, and partly by the
forces of nature. I laughed at him, but he told me so many details that
I began to believe him. He said he and some other friends of his, who
were diamond cutters, had a plant in the midst of the Rocky Mountains,
where they had succeeded in making several small, but very perfect
diamonds. They had come to the end of their rope, though, so to speak,
because they could not afford to buy the materials needed. Folwell
said that he and his companions had temporarily separated, had left the
mountain where they made diamonds, and agreed to meet there later when
they had more money with which to purchase materials. They had all
agreed to go out into civilization, and work for enough funds to enable
them to go on with their diamond making.

"I hardly knew whether to believe the man or not, but he offered proof.
He had several small, but very perfect diamonds with him, and he gave
them to me, to have tested in any way I desired.

"I promised to look into the matter, and, as I was quite wealthy, as,
in fact I am now, and if I found that the stones he gave me were real, I
said I might invest some money in the plant."

"Were the diamonds good?" asked Tom, who was beginning to be interested.

"They were--stones of the first water, though small. An expert gem
merchant, to whom I took them, said he had never seen any diamonds like
them, and he wanted to know where I got them. Of course I did not tell
him.

"To make a long story short, I saw Folwell again, told him to
communicate with his companions, and to tell them that I would agree to
supply the cash needed, if I could share in the diamond making. To this
they agreed, and, after some weeks spent in preparation, a party of us
set out for Phantom Mountain."

"Phantom Mountain?" interrupted Tom. "Where is it?"

"I don't know, exactly--it's somewhere in the Rockies, but the exact
location is a mystery. That is why I need your help. You will soon
understand the reason. Well, as I said, myself, Folwell and the others,
who were not exactly prepossessing sort of men, started west. When we
got to a small town, called Indian Ridge, near Leadville, Colorado,
the men insisted that I must now proceed in secret, and consent to be
blindfolded, as they were not yet ready to reveal the secret of the
place where they made the diamonds.

"I did not want to agree to this, but they insisted, and I gave in,
foolishly perhaps. At any rate I was blindfolded one night, placed in
a wagon, and we drove off into the mountains. After traveling for some
distance I was led, still blindfolded, up a steep trail.

"When the bandage was taken off my eyes I saw that I was in a large
cave. The men were with me, and they apologized for the necessity that
caused them to blindfold me. They said they were ready to proceed with
the making of diamonds, but I must promise not to seek to discover the
secret until they gave me permission, nor was I to attempt to leave the
cave. I had to agree.

"Next they demanded that I give them a large sum, which I had promised
when they showed me, conclusively, that they could make diamonds. I
refused to do this until I had seen some of the precious stones, and
they agreed that this was fair, but said I would have to wait a few
days.

"Well, I waited, and, all that while, I was virtually a prisoner in the
cave. All I could learn was that it was in the midst of a great range,
near the top, and that one of the peaks was called Phantom Mountain.
Why, I did not learn until later.

"At last one night, during a terrific thunder storm, the leader of the
diamond makers--Folwell--announced that I could now see the stones made.
The men had been preparing their chemicals for some days previous. I
was taken into a small chamber of the cave, and there saw quite a
complicated apparatus. Part of it was a great steel box, with a lever on
it.

"We will let you make some diamonds for yourself," Folwell said to me,
and he directed me to pull the lever of the box, at a certain signal.
The signal came, just as a terrific crash of thunder shook the very
mountain inside of which we were. The box of steel got red-hot, and when
it cooled off it was opened, and was given a handful of white stones.

"Were they diamonds?" asked Tom, eagerly.

Mr. Jenks held out one hand. In the palm glittered a large
stone--ostensibly a diamond. In the rays of the moon it showed all the
colors of the rainbow--a beautiful gem. "That is one of the stones I
made--or rather that I supposed I had made," went on Mr. Jenks. "It is
one of several I have, but they have not all been cut and polished as
has this one.

"Naturally I was much impressed by what I saw, and, after I had made
certain tests which convinced me that the stones in the steel box were
diamonds, I paid over the money as I had promised. That was my undoing."

"How?"

"As soon as the men got the cash, they had no further use for me. The
next I remember is eating a rude meal, while we discussed the future of
making diamonds. I knew nothing more until I found myself back in the
small hotel at Indian Ridge, whence I had gone some time previous, with
the men, to the cave in the mountain."

"What happened?" asked Tom, much surprised by the unexpected outcome of
the affair.

"I had been tricked, that was all! As soon as the men had my
money they had no further use for me. They did not want me to learn the
secret of their diamond making, and they drugged me, carried me away
from the cave, and left me in the hotel."

"Didn't you try to find the cave again?"

"I did, but without avail. I spent some time in the Rockies, but no one
could tell where Phantom Mountain was; in fact, few had heard of it, and
I was nearly lost searching for it.

"I came back East, determined to get even. I had given the men a
very large sum of money, and, in exchange, they had given me several
diamonds. Probably the stones are worth nearly as much as the money I
invested, but I was cheated, for I was promised an equal share in the
profits. These were denied me, and I was tricked. I determined to be
revenged, or at least to discover the secret of making diamonds. It is
my right."

"I agree with you," spoke Tom.

"But, up to the time I met you on Earthquake Island, I could form no
plan for discovering Phantom Mountain, and learning the secret of the
diamond makers," went on Mr. Jenks. "I carried the gems about with me,
as you doubtless saw when we were on the island. But I knew I needed an
airship in which to fly over the mountains, and pick out the location of
the cave where the diamonds are made."

"But how can you locate it, if you were blindfolded when you were taken
there, Mr. Jenks?"

"I forgot to tell you that, on our journey into the mountains, and just
before I was carried into the cave, I managed to raise one corner of
the bandage. I caught a glimpse of a very peculiarly shaped cliff--it
is like a great head, standing out in bold relief against the moonlight,
when I saw it. That head of rock is near the cave. It may be the
landmark by which we can locate Phantom Mountain."

"Perhaps," admitted the young inventor.

"What I want to know is this," went on Mr. Jenks. "Will you go with me
on this quest--go in your airship to discover the secret of the diamond
makers? If you will, I will share with you whatever diamonds we can
discover, or make; besides paying all expenses. Will you go, Tom Swift?"

The young inventor did not know what to answer. How far was Mr. Jenks
to be trusted? Were the stones he had real diamonds? Was his story,
fantastical as it sounded--true? Would it be safe for Tom to go?

The lad asked himself these questions. Mr. Jenks saw his hesitation.

"Here," said the strange man, "I will prove what I say. Take this
diamond. I intended it for you, anyhow, for what you did for me on
Earthquake Island. Take it, and--and give it to the person for whom you
were about to purchase a diamond to-night. But, first of all, take it to
a gem expert, and get his opinion. That will prove the truth of what
I say, Tom Swift, and I feel sure that you will cast your lot in with
mine, and help me to discover the secret of Phantom Mountain, and aid me
to get my rights from the diamond makers!"




CHAPTER IV--ANDY FOGER GETS A FRIGHT


Tom Swift considered a few minutes. On the face of it, the proposition
appealed to him. He had been home some time now after his adventures on
Earthquake Island, and he was beginning to long for more excitement. The
search for the mysterious mountain, and the cave of the diamond makers,
might offer a new field for him. But there came to him a certain
distrust of Mr. Jenks.

"I don't like to doubt your word," began Tom, slowly, "but you know,
Mr. Jenks, that some of the greatest chemists have tried in vain to make
diamonds; or, at best, they have made only tiny ones. To think that any
man, or set of men, made real diamonds as large as the ones you have,
doesn't seem--well--" and Tom hesitated.

"You mean you can hardly believe me?" asked Mr. Jenks.

"I guess that's it," assented Tom.

"I don't blame you a bit!" exclaimed the odd man. "In fact, I didn't
believe it when they told me they could make diamonds. But they proved
it to me. I'm ready now to prove it to you."

"I'll tell you what I'll do. Here's this one stone, cut ready for
setting. Here's another, uncut," and Mr. Jenks drew from his pocket
what looked like a piece of crystal. "Take them to any jeweler," he
resumed--"to the one in whose place I saw you to-night. I'll abide by
the verdict you get, and I'll come here to-morrow night, and hear what
you have to say."

"Why do you come at night?" asked Tom, thinking there was something
suspicious in that.

"Because my life might be in danger if I was seen talking to you, and
showing you diamonds in the daytime--especially just now.

"Why at this particular time?"

"For the reason that the diamond makers are on my trail. As long as I
remained quiet, after their shabby treatment of me, and did not try to
discover their secret, they were all right. But, after I realized that
I had been cheated out of my rights, and when I began to make an
investigation, with a view to discovering their secret whereabouts, I
received mysterious and anonymous warnings to stop."

"But I did not. I came East, and tried to get help to discover the cave
of the diamond makers, but I was unsuccessful. I needed an airship, as
I said, and no person who could operate one, would agree to go with
me on the quest. Again I received a warning to drop all search for the
diamond makers, but I persisted, and about a week ago I found I was
being shadowed."

"Shadowed; by whom?" asked Tom.

"By a man I never remember seeing, but who, I have no doubt, is one of
the diamond-making gang."

"Do you think he means you harm?"

"I'm sure of it. That is the reason I have to act so in secret, and come
to see you at night. I don't want those scoundrels to find out what I am
about to do. On my return from Earthquake Island, I again endeavored to
interest an airship man in my plan, but he evidently thought me insane.
Then I thought of you, as I had done before, but I was afraid you, too,
would laugh at my proposition. However, I decided to come here, and I
did. It seemed almost providential that my first view of you was in
a jewelry shop, looking at diamonds. I took it as a good omen. Now it
remains with you. May I call here to-morrow night, and get your answer?"

Tom Swift made up his mind quickly. After all it would be easy enough to
find out if the diamonds were real. If they were, he could then decide
whether or not to go with Mr. Jenks on the mysterious quest. So he
answered:

"I'll consider the matter, Mr. Jenks. I'll meet you here to-morrow
night. In the meanwhile, for my own satisfaction, I'll let an expert
look at these stones."

"Get the greatest diamond expert in the world, and he'll pronounce them
perfect!" predicted the odd man. "Now I'll bid you goodnight, and be
going. I'll be here at this time to-morrow."

As Mr. Jenks turned aside there was a movement among the trees in the
orchard, and a shadowy figure was seen hurrying away.

"Who's that?" asked the diamond man, in a hoarse whisper. "Did you see
that, Tom Swift? Some one was here--listening to what I said! Perhaps it
was the man who has been shadowing me!"

"I think not. I guess it was Eradicate Sampson, a colored man who does
work for us," said Tom. "Is that you, Rad?" he called.

"Yais, sah, Massa Tom, heah I is!" answered the voice of the negro,
but it came from an entirely different direction than that in which the
shadowy figure had been seen.

"Where are you, Rad?" called the young inventor.

"Right heah," was the reply, and the colored man came from the direction
of the stable. "I were jest out seein' if mah mule Boomerang were all
right. Sometimes he's restless, an' don't sleep laik he oughter."

"Then that wasn't you over in the orchard?" asked Tom, in some
uneasiness.

"No, sah, I ain't been in de orchard. I were sleepin' in mah shack, till
jest a few minutes ago, when I got up, an' went in t' see Boomerang.
I had a dream dat some coon were tryin t' steal him, an' it sort ob
'sturbed me, laik."

"If it wasn't your man, it was some one else," said Mr. Jenks,
decidedly.

"We'll have a look!" exclaimed Tom. "Here, Rad, come over and scurry
among those trees. We just saw some one sneaking around."

"I'll sure do dat!" cried the colored man. "Mebby it were somebody arter
Boomerang! I'll find 'em."

"I don't believe it was any one after the mule," murmured Mr. Jenks,
"but it certainly was some one--more likely some one after me."

The three made a hasty search among the trees, but the intruder had
vanished, leaving no trace. They went out into the road, which the moon
threw into bold relief along its white stretch, but there was no figure
scurrying away.

"Whoever it was, is gone," spoke Tom. "You can go back to bed, Rad,"
for the colored man, of late, had been sleeping in a shack on the Swift
premises.

"And I guess it's time for me to go, too," added Mr. Jenks. "I'll be
here to-morrow night, Tom, and I hope your answer will be favorable."

Tom did not sleep well the remainder of the night, for his fitful
slumbers were disturbed by dreams of enormous caves, filled with
diamonds, with dark, shadowy figures trying to put him into a red-hot
steel box. Once he awakened with a start, and put his hand under his
pillow to feel if the two stones Mr. Jenks had given him, were still
there. They had not been disturbed.

Tom made up his mind to find out if the stones were really diamonds,
before saying anything to his father about the chance of going to seek
Phantom Mountain. And the young inventor wished to get the opinion of
some other jeweler than Mr. Track--at least, at first.

"Though if this one proves to be a good gem, I'll have Mr. Track set it
in a brooch, and give it to Mary for her birthday," decided the young
inventor. "Guess I'll take a run over to Chester in the Butterfly, and
see what one of the jewelers there has to say."

In addition to his big airship, Red Cloud, Tom owned a small, swift
monoplane, which he called Butterfly. This had been damaged by Andy
Foger just before Tom left on the trip that ended at Earthquake Island,
but the monoplane had been repaired, and Andy had left town, not having
returned since.

Telling his father that he was going off on a little business trip,
which he often did in his aeroplane, Tom, with the aid of Mr. Jackson,
the engineer, wheeled the Butterfly out of its shed.

Adjusting the mechanism, and seeing that it was in good shape, Tom took
his place in one of the two seats, for the monoplane would carry two.
Mr. Jackson then spun the propellers, and, with a crackle and roar the
motor started. Over the ground ran the dainty, little aeroplane, until,
having momentum enough, Tom tilted the wing planes and the machine
sailed up into the air.

Rising about a thousand feet, and circling about several times to test
the wind currents, Tom headed his craft toward Chester, a city about
fifty miles from Shopton. In his pocket, snugly tucked away, were the
two stones Mr. Jenks had given him.

It was not long before Tom saw, looming up in the distance the church
spires and towering factory chimneys of Chester, for his machine was a
speedy one, and could make ninety miles an hour when driven. But now a
slower speed satisfied our hero.

"I'll just drop down outside of the city," he reasoned, "for too much
of a crowd gathers when I land in the street. Besides I might frighten
horses, and then, too, it's hard to get a good start from the street.
I'll leave it in some barn until I want to go back."

Tom sent his craft down, in order to pick out a safe place for a
landing. He was then over the suburbs of the city, and was following the
line of a straight country road.

"Looks like a good place there," he murmured. "I'll shut off the motor,
and vol-plane down."

Suiting the action to the word, Tom shut off his power. The little craft
dipped toward the ground, but the lad threw up the forward planes, and
caught a current of air that sent him skimming along horizontally.

As he got nearer to the ground, he saw the figure of a lad riding a
bicycle along the country highway. Something about the figure struck Tom
as being familiar, and he recognized the cyclist a moment later.

"It's Andy Foger!" said Tom, in a whisper. "I wondered where he had been
keeping himself since he damaged the Butterfly. Evidently he doesn't
dare venture back to Shopton. Well, here's where I give him a scare."

Tom's monoplane was making no more noise, now, than a soaring bird. He
was gliding swiftly toward the earth, and, with the plan in his mind of
administering some sort of punishment to the bully, he aimed the machine
directly at him.

Nearer and nearer shot the monoplane, as quietly as a sheet of paper
might fall. Andy pedaled on, never looking up nor behind him, A moment
later, as Tom threw up his headplanes, to make his landing more easy,
and just as he swooped down at one side of the cyclist, our hero let out
a most alarming yell, right into Andy's ear.

"Now I've got you!" he shouted. "I'll teach you to slash my aeroplane!
Come with me!"

Andy gave one look at the white bird-like apparatus that had flown up
beside him so noiselessly, and, being too frightened to recognize Tom's
voice, must have thought that he had been overtaken by some supernatural
visitor.

Andy gave a yell like an Indian, about to do a stage scalping act, and
fairly dived over the handlebars of his bicycle, sprawling in a heap on
the dusty road.

"I guess that will hold you for a while," observed Tom, grimly, as he
put on the ground-brake and brought his monoplane to a stop not far from
the fallen rider.


