We often hear it said that the present controversy in the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A. is simply a personal squabble between Dr. Machen 
and Dr. Speer, with Dr. Machen as the cause and the aggressor.  It is 
also stated that the difference between these two is merely 
administrative, and that this administrative difference is of recent 
date.

No two statements about the present conflict in our beloved Church could 
be farther from the truth. Dr. Machen, and we who are associated with 
him, are just as opposed to the principles of many others who are in 
control of the ecclesiastical organization of the Presbyterian Church in 
the U.S.A. as we are to the principles for which Dr. Speer stands in the 
present controversy.  And to say that the difference between us is 
administrative is simply to ignore the real basic issue, which is 
doctrinal through and through.  What is more, a study of the history of 
the doctrinal defection in the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. will 
show that the present crisis is only the culmination of one hundred and 
thirty years of gradual yielding to anti-Presbyterian doctrine.

The Church is reaping what it has sowed.  A glance at the history of the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. will show how amazingly true this is.

Union of 1801

In 1 801 the General Association of Connecticut and the General Assembly 
of the Presbyterian Church adopted a plan of union.  It was a union 
between the Congregationalists and the Presbyterians in order to avoid 
competition. By the terms of this plan a Presbyterian minister could 
serve in a Congregational Church and vice versa.

Some material growth and prosperity resulted from this merger, but with 
it came the inroads of New England theology and the beginnings of 
doctrinal impurity.  Hopkinsianism, which originated in New England and 
which denied that man is depraved and separated from God because he is a 
member of the race of Adam, spread throughout the Presbyterian Church.

The Rev. Albert Barnes, pastor of the First Presbyterian Church of 
Philadelphia, was tried for heresy on this point.  He denied that Adam’s 
guilt was imputed to the human race. But the General Assembly of 1836 
did not convict him, largely because the New School of Theology had 
gained control of the Assembly.

Dr. Lyman Beecher, professor at Lane Theological Seminary, was tried for 
heresy in respect to original sin, total depravity, regeneration, 
accountability, free agency, and Christian character.  The Presbytery of 
Cincinnati in 1835 acquitted him and so did the Synod.  The case was not 
carried to the General Assembly.

The acquittal of these two ministers meant that heresy was rampant in 
the denomination, and that the New School Party was growing in strength 
and could at times control the General Assembly.

Old and New School—1837-1870

When the General Assembly met in 1837 in Philadelphia the Old School was 
in a majority and it decided to abrogate the Plan of Union of 1801.  A 
“Testimony and Memorial” was addressed to the Assembly exhibiting the 
doctrinal errors and lapses in the Church.  The Old School leaders were 
determined to divide the Church so that a True Presbyterian Church would 
result.  After much debate the synods of Western Reserve, Utica, Geneva 
and Genesee were exscinded because these synods were most affected by 
the New England theology.

Thus the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. was divided into the Old 
School Assembly and the New School Assembly.

This was a bold step, but it was the only real solution to the 
differences in doctrine between the two groups in the Church.  The Old 
School was truly Presbyterian in doctrine and polity while the New 
School was tainted with anti-Reformed and anti-Scriptural beliefs.

Union of 1870

If the division into Old and New Schools had continued it is very likely 
that the present doctrinal crisis in the Presbyterian Church in the 
U.S.A. would never have occurred.  But, alas, the Civil War produced new 
issues which made the Old School Assembly and the New School Assembly 
forget their differences, and a union was effected in 1870.  That union 
should never have taken place.  It brought together two parties who 
disagreed fundamentally as to doctrine.  It was one of the most tragic 
events in Presbyterian history.

Heresy Trials

The bad effect of the 1870 union was seen almost immediately.  The New 
School Party began to urge the revision of the creed of the Church.  
This was debated and studied for many years, but in 1890 the General 
Assembly, even though it had received sixty memorials asking for a new 
and shorter creed, laid the whole matter on the table.  But such 
procedure did not settle the differences.  Instead, false doctrine 
continued to flourish in the Church.

Dr. Charles A. Briggs of Union Theological Seminary, New York City, was 
convicted and suspended from the ministry in 1893 for his failure to 
hold to the inerrancy of the Scriptures.

Dr. Henry Preserved Smith of Lane Theological Seminary was suspended 
from the ministry in 1894 for practically the same offense.

Professor A. C. McGiffert of Union Theological Seminary, New York City, 
had expressed his views as favorable to the destructive results of 
higher criticism.  The attention of the Presbytery of New York was 
called to this in 1899 but before a trial was instituted Dr. McGiffert 
withdrew from the Church.

The Declaratory Statement of 1903

But the trouble did not stop with the heresy trials.  The New School 
Party kept up its fight to revise the Standards of the Church.  This 
movement to revise the Standards had been temporarily halted in 1890 
when the General Assembly laid the matter on the table, but in 1900 the 
Assembly revived the project.  Finally in 1903 the revision was 
consummated.

This revision consists of three parts: (1) A declaratory statement, 
explaining Chapter III of the Confession of Faith concerning God’s 
eternal decree, and explaining Chapter X, section 3, concerning elect 
infants; (2) changes in text in three other articles; (3) the addition 
of two chapters to the Confession of Faith on the Holy Spirit and on the 
Love of God and Missions.

These changes, particularly the declaratory statement and the chapter on 
the Love of God and Missions, are un-Reformed in theology and certainly 
should not be in our Standards.  They merely show that the temper of the 
Church at that time was to conciliate and compromise on the Reformed 
Faith.

Union of 1906

In 1906 the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. and the Cumberland 
Presbyterian Church were united on the basis of the Confession as 
revised in 1903.  These revisions do not change the system of doctrine 
to which office-bearers must subscribe in ordination, but they do 
seriously mar the Confession of Faith.  It is sad that statements of an 
un-Reformed nature were allowed to be written into the Confession of 
Faith.

This was simply a union between a Church with a Reformed or Calvinistic 
creed and one which had an un-Reformed Confession.  How could such a 
union accomplish anything but a weakening of testimony?

An Attempt at Union

Many attempts at union with other denominations have been made by the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., but one of the most important efforts 
was the proposal to merge eighteen Protestant communions into one body.  
Thirty-five presbyteries overtured the General Assembly meeting at 
Columbus, Ohio, in 1918, to consider such a union.  The Bills and 
Overtures Committee of that Assembly recommended that the Committee on 
Church Co-operation and Union take charge of such negotiations with 
other Evangelical denominations looking forward to a union.  In 1920 the 
General Assembly meeting in Philadelphia listened to the plan of union 
as drawn up by a committee representing these eighteen denominations.

The preamble to this plan of union, which gives its doctrinal basis, 
shows how utterly vague and nullifying would have been the testimony of 
such a merger.  It demonstrates further the fact that there were many in 
our Church who seemed to be perfectly indifferent to doctrine.  The 
doctrinal section of the preamble reads:

“Whereas: We desire to share, as a common heritage, the faith of the 
Christian Church, which has from time to time, found expression in great 
historic statements; and
Whereas: We all share belief in God our Father; in Jesus Christ, His 
only Son, our Saviour; in the Holy Spirit, our Guide and Comforter; in 
the Holy Catholic Church, through which God’s eternal purpose of 
salvation is to be proclaimed and the Kingdom of God is to be realized 
on earth; in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments as containing 
God’s revealed will, and in the life eternal,”

A Modernist could have subscribed to such a creed, because it was so 
vague and so general. Fortunately the proposed union was defeated.

The Auburn Affirmation

But the New School of Theology continued to grow in influence in the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. When the General Assembly of 1923 
declared that the infallibility of Holy Scripture, the virgin birth, the 
substitutionary atonement, the bodily resurrection of our Lord, and the 
miracles of Christ are essential doctrines of our faith and that every 
minister in the Church should believe in them, a great storm of protest 
arose.  A document was issued by some Presbyterian ministers in Auburn, 
New York, stating that the General Assembly had no right to elevate 
these five doctrines as tests for ordination; and further it stated that 
these doctrines are not essential to the Christian Faith, but are merely 
theories implying that there are other theories to explain these truths.  
And what is more, the Affirmation attacked directly the inerrancy and 
full truthfulness of Holy Scripture.

To show that our contention is true, namely, that unbelief in the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. has been growing, we can point to the 
bald fact that 1293 ministers of that denomination signed the heretical 
Auburn Affirmation.  And the astonishing truth is that not one of these 
ministers has been tried for heresy.

The Reorganization of Princeton Seminary

The last great citadel of orthodoxy in the Presbyterian Church in the 
U.S.A. was Princeton Theological Seminary.  It had been standing like a 
rock against the inroads of Modernism, and for over one hundred years it 
had been sending out ministers trained in the Bible as the Word of God.  
This fact troubled those who were leading the forces of unbelief in the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.  They knew that Princeton Seminary had 
to be captured if the source of supply for sound ministers in the 
denomination were to cease.

Without entering into the full details of that story, suffice it to say 
that in 1929 Princeton Theological Seminary was reorganized so as to be 
complacent toward Modernism.  Two Auburn Affirmationists were placed on 
its Board of Trustees.  The full rout of orthodoxy in the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A. was thus practically accomplished.

But thank God that Westminster Theological Seminary was organized in 
1929 to carry on the tradition of the old Princeton.  God has richly 
blessed this institution, so that today all of its 112 graduates except 
one have fields of labor.  The testimony of the gospel through these men 
has gone forth throughout the length and breadth of the land and around 
the world.

The Independent Board

We come now to the last phase of the fight between the forces of 
unbelief and those of the Bible in the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.

The publication of Re-Thinking Missions and the resignation of Mrs. J. 
Lossing Buck as a missionary of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. 
captured the attention of the Christian world and focused that attention 
on foreign missions.

In regard to Re-Thinking Missions, which sets forth unbelief in a very 
thoroughgoing way, and in regard to the heretical views of Mrs. Buck, 
the Board of Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. 
assumed a vacillating position.

This led to an investigation of the program and policies of the Board of 
Foreign Missions by Dr. J. Gresham Machen.  The rest we know.  Dr. 
Machen found the worst kind of Modernism in that Board.  He published 
his findings in a 110-page pamphlet entitled “Modernism and the Board of 
Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.”

Overtures were sent up to the General Assembly in 1933, asking the 
Assembly to reform the Board of Foreign Missions.  Instead of reforming 
the Board, the General Assembly exonerated it, commended its work to the 
Church, and ended by singing a paean of praise to the Senior Secretary 
of the Board.

Everything constitutional had been done in the attempt to purify the 
Board, but without avail.  There remained therefore no truly Biblical 
and truly Presbyterian foreign missionary agency within the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A.  Accordingly such a missionary agency, which would 
be outside of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. and independent of 
all ecclesiastical control, had to be organized.  The Independent Board 
for Presbyterian Foreign Missions thus came into being.

The “Mandate” of  1934

In 1934 the General Assembly meeting at Cleveland, Ohio, issued a 
so-called “mandate” ordering members of the Independent Board to resign 
on pain of ecclesiastical discipline.  This declaration of the 1934 
Assembly stated in so many words that any member of the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A. who refused to support the boards and agencies of 
the Church to the utmost of his ability was as guilty as one who refused 
to partake of the Lord’s Supper.

There we have the quintessence of Modernism, which is the substitution 
of the word of man for the Word of God.  The General Assembly in issuing 
that declaration was trying to compel every member of the Church to 
support Modernism whether he wanted to or not.  Nothing could deny more 
completely the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Members of the Independent Board have refused to obey the “mandate.”  As 
the result some have been suspended from the ministry and are awaiting 
the final adjudication of their cases at the General Assembly meeting in 
Syracuse next May.

The Last Stand Against Unbelief

At the meeting of the General Assembly in May, the culmination of this 
long hard battle against unbelief will be reached.  For nearly a century 
and a half the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. has been yielding to 
anti-Presbyterianism point by point until today it stands at the 
cross-roads.  Today that denomination gives every evidence of being 
content to tolerate Modernism in its corporate witness.  It is perfectly 
clear that when all prejudice and bitterness are set aside, we have left 
the basic issue, the Word of God versus unbelief.

Let us not be deceived in this matter.  When the Permanent Judicial 
Commission of the General Assembly brings in its decision on the 
Independent Board cases and the General Assembly, sitting as a court, 
affirms or denies that decision, then and there will be decided the 
destiny of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.  Will it succumb 
completely to the enemies of the Cross or will it repudiate unbelief?  
That is a question of far-reaching significance which the Christian 
world is waiting to hear answered.

Some of us are determined by the grace of God to stand on the side of 
the gospel regardless of cost.

On which side will you stand ?


