A Survey Of Christian
Epistemology

Preface
The first edition of this syllabus was written in 1932. The title then used was The
Metaphysics of Apologetics. How ancient and out of date such a title seems to be now.
Was I, perhaps, at that “pre-historic” time unaware of the fact that Hegel had slain the
Alte Metaphysik? Did I not see the drift toward the positivism of the new day?
The answer is that then, as now, I was convinced that only if one begins with the self-
identifying Christ of Reformation theology, can one bring the “facts” of the space-time
world into intelligible relation to the “laws” of this world. Science, philosophy and
theology find their intelligible contact only on the presupposition of the self-revelation of
God in Christ—through Scripture understood properly by the regeneration of the Holy
Spirit.
Apologetics had always been unbiblical and therefore inadequate. What needed to be
done was to point out that man himself, the subject of knowledge, must interpret himself
as the creature of God, as a sinner in the sight of God, and as forgiven through the work
of Christ and his Spirit. All men know God, but all men as sinners seek to suppress their
knowledge of God. They do this particularly by means of their various philosophical
systems. This fact must be pointed out. Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world? It was not till later years that I received much help in my understanding of
philosophy from D. H. Th. Vollenhoven and Herman Dooyeweerd.
The syllabus is offered in this second edition for the consideration of those who are
interested in the spread of the “whole counsel of God.”
Table Of Contents
Introduction
The subject of a Christian View of Life must be studied historically and
systematically in order to understand it comprehensively. If we study it thus we find that
we face an ultimate choice between Christian and non-Christian epistemology. Especially
because of the modern emphasis on the Immanence of God, it is necessary to become
clearly aware of the deep antithesis between the two main types of epistemology.
Chapter 1
Epistemological Terminology
A preliminary survey of epistemological terminology brings out that this terminology
itself has grown out of a milieu which has colored its connotation. It will not do to speak
of the inductive and deductive methods as though theists and non-theists meant the same
things when they use these terms. The term induction means one thing for a theist who
presupposes God and another thing for a non-theist who does not presuppose God. For a
theist induction is the implication into God-centered “facts” by a God-centered mind; for
a non-theist it means the implication into self-centered facts by a self-centered mind. The
same difference prevails in the case of such terms as analysis and synthesis,
correspondence and coherence, objectivity and subjectivity, a priori and a posteriori,
implication and linear inference and transcendental versus syllogistic reasoning. A non-
theist uses all these terms univocally, while a theist may use any or all of them
analogically.
Chapter 2
Historical Survey
A. Greek Epistemology: Its Starting Point
The question we must ask constantly is how anyone has conceived of the relation of
the human mind to the divine mind. It is on this point that the greatest difference obtains
between the theistic and the non-theistic position. The former cannot think of the human
mind as functional at all except when it is in contact with God; the latter presupposes it to
be possible that the human mind function normally whether or not God exists. For this
reason it is fair and necessary to emphasize the fact that Greek speculation was at the
outset antitheistic and not neutral as is often said.
It is necessary too to keep in mind that the long argument about the relation of the
finite subject to the finite object is quite subsidiary to the main question of the relation of
the finite mind to God.
Chapter 3
Historical Survey
B. Greek Epistemology: Its Climax
When due consideration has been given to the differences among Greek thinkers, it
may still be said that they present a united front. Accordingly, we study Plato’s thought
as typical of the Greek position.
There is a special value in studying Greek epistemology since it has not been brought
into any contact with Christianity: antitheistic epistemology appears here without
intermixture of theistic elements.
Moreover, Plato’s views may be taken as a fair sample of all antitheistic speculation
to the present day. We may say that Plato first tried to interpret reality in terms of the
sense world. Then he tried to interpret reality in terms of the Ideal world. Finally he tried
to interpret reality in terms of a mixture of temporal and eternal categories. In this way
Plato exhausted the antitheistic possibilities. Modern epistemology presents no more than
variations on these themes.
Chapter 4
Historical Survey
C. Mediaeval Epistemology: Its Starting Point
As we took Plato for a representative of Greek epistemology, so we may take
Augustine for a representative of early Christian epistemology.
We would note that Augustine’s thought, though in many ways Platonic, is
fundamentally the polar opposite of Plato’s thought. Plato assumed that the human mind
can function independently of God; Augustine held that man’s thought is a thinking of
God’s thoughts after him. Accordingly, Augustine did not seek to interpret reality by any
of the three Platonic methods. He sought rather to give a philosophy of history in terms of
the counsel of God. Augustine found in the conception of the Trinity the union of the
logical principles of identity and difference, while Plato had sought for the origin of
diversity in the sense world.
Chapter 5
Historical Survey
D. Mediaeval Epistemology: Its Climax
Instead of developing further the great differences between the two main types of
epistemology, Scholasticism attempts to harmonize the Greek and the theistic traditions.
The problem of the “universals” was treated by the Scholastics with an
underestimation of the fact that epistemological terminology is not a neutral something.
Accordingly, the main question in epistemology, i.e., that of the relation of the finite to
the divine mind, was subordinated to the less important question of the relation of the
finite mind to finite laws and “facts.” The result was that though there was much valuable
discussion of details, the main issue between theism and antitheism was not clarified but
obscured by Scholasticism. The issue remains obscure in the Roman Catholic church to
this day.
Chapter 6
Historical Survey
E. Modern Epistemology: Lutheranism
The Reformation as a whole was a great advance in the direction of the clarification
of the issue between theism and non-theism. This advance was possible because the
theologians of the Reformation period developed Christian doctrine on its subjective side.
This helped to bring Christianity into an indissoluble union with theism so that it was
seen that the one cannot be defended without the other. This in turn helped to do away
with the distinction between the “that” and the “what” in the field of theistic argument.
Slowly it dawned on Christian apologetics that the existence of God must not be
separated from the character of God, and the character of God must not be separated from
the redemptive plan of God in its objective element, the Scriptures, and in its subjective
element, regeneration.
Lutheranism, however, retained some of Scholastic thought and was not able, on that
account, to carry the Reformation principle as far as it otherwise would have carried it. In
the Lutheran conception of the sacraments the difference between the divine and the
human is not clearly seen to be metaphysically absolute. Accordingly, there is in
Lutheranism a remnant of impersonalism. The human consciousness is at some points
thought of as being surrounded by something else than the personal God.
Chapter 7
Historical Survey
F. Modern Epistemology: Arminianism
The impersonalism spoken of in connection with Lutheranism appears more clearly in
Arminian epistemology. Its theological position with respect to the human will makes it
especially liable to attack from non-theistic epistemology. Instead of developing the
Reformation doctrine that the human consciousness cannot function independently of
God, Arminianism has to an extent compromised with the enemy on this point. Watson,
Miley and Curtis maintain positions which indicate that if one yields on the non-theistic
point of the independence of the finite consciousness there is no stopping till one lands in
the impersonalism of “personalism.”
Chapter 8
Historical Survey
G. Modern Epistemology: Calvinism
In Calvinism the issue between theistic and non-theistic epistemology came to the
clearest and fullest expression.
Calvin developed the real Reformation doctrines spoken of above. He recognized
clearly that main principle that the finite consciousness must from the outset be set in
contact with the consciousness of God. Accordingly, he used the “theistic arguments”
more theistically than they had been used before. He did not separate the “what” from the
“that.” He took into his purview the absolute God, the absolute Christ, the absolute
Scripture and absolute regeneration, and maintained that all of this must be taken or
nothing can be taken. He cleared Christian theistic thought from much of the Platonism
that clung to it till his time.
Chapter 9
Historical Survey
H. Modern Epistemology: Antitheistic
Modern antitheistic epistemology is but a continuation of the arguments of Plato on
the assumptions of Plato.
Descartes founded the whole knowledge scheme upon the independent activity of the
finite consciousness in its relation to objects that are independent of God.
Kant maintained that the finite consciousness can have knowledge of the phenomenal
world even if it has no knowledge of the noumenal world.
The Pragmatist school has consistently worked out the Kantian principle and has
boldly proclaimed the sufficiency of temporal categories for the interpretation of reality.
The Idealist school has been inconsistent on this point, but is built upon the same
Kantian presuppositions.
Chapter 10
The Starting Point Of Christian Epistemology
A. The Object Of Knowledge
After the historical survey we come to a more thetical statement. In it we must seek to
bring the theistic and the non-theistic positions face to face with one another on the
central issue of the relation of the finite consciousness to God.
We may begin the argument by discussing what is involved in the ordinary
knowledge transaction of man. Christian theism claims that finite consciousness can
know nothing about anything except upon the presupposition of the absolute self-
consciousness of God. The non-theistic position holds to the opposite of this.
We try then to show that non-theism has taken its position for granted instead of
proving it. In the first place non-theism has done this with respect to the object of
knowledge. It has assumed the existence of the objects of knowledge and the possibility
of their having a meaning apart from God. Similarly it has taken for granted that error is a
natural thing, so that it cannot be said that Scripture is necessary in order that the object
of knowledge may appear for what it is.
Chapter 11
The Starting Point Of Christian Epistemology
B. The Subject Of Knowledge: Extreme Antitheism
The main question in dispute between Christians and their opponents comes out most
clearly when the subject of knowledge is discussed. It is then that we must give an
answer to the question whether the human mind is able in itself to interpret reality.
On this important point we note that the opponents of Christian theism have taken for
granted that which they ought to have proved, namely, the independence and therefore
the ultimacy of the human mind. We point out this fact in the case of those who have
reasoned after the fashion of Plato’s first method. Of these we mention especially the
“experience” philosophers and theologians. In the second place we point out this fact in
the case of those who have reasoned after the fashion of Plato’s second method of
explaining reality in exclusively logical or eternal categories. B. Russell, J. E. McTaggart
and F. H. Bradley may serve as illustrations here. Finally we point out this fact in the case
of those who have reasoned after the fashion of Plato’s third method of reasoning. Of
these Bosanquet is given special consideration because he has more fully than any other
worked out the problems of logic and the theory of judgment. It appears that in its most
thorough expression antitheism has taken for granted what it should have proved.
Chapter 12
The Starting PointC. The Subject OfOf Christian Epistemology
Knowledge: Milder Antitheism
There is a special reason for fearing what seem to be approaches to a theistic
epistemology on the part of those whose philosophy is built upon the Idealist theory of
judgment. So the philosophy of A. Seth Pringle-Pattison seems to be more theistic than
that of Bosanquet. In reality it is just as antitheistic as that of Bosanquet, inasmuch as the
human mind is still thought of as functioning in independence of God.
The same judgment must be passed on the methods of the philosophy of religion
schools of modern philosophy. C. C. J. Webb shows that even a great emphasis on
personalism does not make one a theist.
Modern psychology is also based upon the antitheistic assumption of the ultimacy of
the human mind. The psychology of James Ward proves this claim.
Finally we note that even the strong emphasis upon the personality of God as
maintained by such men as A. H. Rashdall, J. Lindsay, J. Royce and E. Hocking cannot
place one in the theistic camp if one’s philosophy is built upon the assumption of the
truth of the antitheistic epistemology.
Chapter 13
The Starting Point Of Christian Epistemology
D. The Subject Of Knowledge: Idealism And Christianity
Having begun the consideration of movements on philosophy that work in the
direction of theism, we must now turn to some writers who, though building upon the
Idealist system of logic, approach Christianity in the statement of their philosophy.
A. E. Taylor may be taken as an example of those philosophers who try to make room
for Christianity upon the basis of the assumed correlativity of time and eternity, but who
must necessarily fail because Christianity presupposes the conception of God as self-
sufficient.
B. P. Bowne’s philosophy may serve to illustrate the fact that if one rejects what
seems to be such a minor matter as biblical infallibility, one cannot stop till he has
rejected theism as well as Christianity.
Chapter 14
The Starting Point Of Christian Epistemology
E. The Subject-Subject Relation
If it is true that the difference between Christian and antitheistic epistemology is as
fundamental as we have contended that it is, and if it is true that the antitheist takes his
position for granted at the outset of his investigations, and if it is true that the Christian
expects his opponent to do nothing else inasmuch as according to Scripture the “natural
man” cannot discern the things of the Spirit, we must ask whether it is then of any use for
the Christian to reason with his opponent.
The answer to this question must not be sought by toning down the dilemma as is
easily and often done by the assumption that epistemological terminology means the
same thing for theists and non-theists alike. The answer must rather be sought in the basic
concept of Christian theism, namely, that God is absolute. If God is absolute man must
always remain accessible to him. Man’s ethical alienation plays upon the background of
his metaphysical dependence. God may therefore use our reasoning or our preaching as a
way by which he presents himself to those who have assumed his non-existence.
Chapter 15
The Method Of Christian Epistemology
After we have asked the question whether Christians should seek to reason with non-
theists, and have answered that question in the affirmative, we must now ask how
Christians should argue with the opponents.
Our answer must once more be that the method of reasoning employed must be
consistent with and flow out of the position defended. Non-theists always reason
univocally. Christians must always reason analogically. They may and must use the same
terminology as their opponents, but while using this terminology they cannot afford to
forget for a fraction of a second the presupposition of the absolute self-consciousness of
God, which alone gives meaning to the terminology they employ.
If this fundamental canon of Christian reasoning be always kept in mind, we can
begin reasoning with our opponents at any point in heaven or earth and may for
arguments sake present Christian theism as one hypothesis among many, and may for
argument’s sake place ourselves upon the ground of our opponent in order to see what
will happen. In all this it will remain our purpose to seek to reduce the non-theistic
position, in whatever form it appears, to an absurdity. In our preaching we say that those
who do not accept Christ are lost. Our reasoning can do nothing less.
Chapter 16
A Sample Of Christian Argument
It was useful to seek to apply the method of reasoning discussed in the previous
chapters to the various schools of philosophy about us. However, since we have
constantly sought to bring out that all forms of antitheistic thinking can be reduced to
one, and since the issue is fundamentally that of the acceptance or the rejection of the
concept of God, it may suffice to apply the analogical method of reasoning in an
argument with those who hold to the “scientific method” of the day. That scientific
method is agnostic. It claims to be willing to accept any fact that may appear, but
unwilling to start with the idea of God.
Reasoning analogically with this type of thought, we seek to point out that it is
psychologically, epistemologically and morally self-contradictory. It is psychologically
self-contradictory because it claims to be making no judgment of any sort at the outset of
its investigation, while as a matter of fact a universal negative judgment is involved in
this effort to make no judgment. It is epistemologically self-contradictory because it starts
by rejecting theism on the ground that its conception of the relation of God to the
universe involves the contradiction that a God all-glorious can have glory added unto
him. By this rejection of God, agnosticism has embraced complete relativism. Yet this
relativism must furnish a basis for the rejection of the absolute. Accordingly, the standard
of self-contradiction taken for granted by antitheistic thought presupposes the absolute
for its operation. Antitheism presupposes theism. One must stand upon the solid ground
of theism to be an effective antitheist.
Finally, agnosticism is morally self-contradictory since it pretends to be very humble
in its insistence that it makes no sweeping conclusions, while as a matter of fact it has
made a universal negative conclusion in total reliance upon itself. The “natural man” is at
enmity against God.
Introduction
What we are concerned with in this syllabus is, first of all, a broad survey, and
secondly, a method of defense of the Christian philosophy of life. We shall not attempt to
give the survey first, and the defense afterward. On the contrary, we shall try to make the
defense as we make the survey, and make the survey as we make the defense. We shall
have to approach the matter of a Christian world-and-life view from an historical point of
view.
Yet after we have dealt with our subject historically, we must deal with it
systematically. Only after we have gained a survey of the field by an historical review,
are we in a position to deal more systematically with any subject. The real point of the
problems of philosophy that confront the human race today cannot be understood if they
have not been observed in their growth. The problems of philosophy are today more
pointed and more specific than they have ever been. But we cannot deal with the more
pointed and the more specific until we have dealt with the more general. On the other
hand, our final interest is very definitely in the systematic development of our subject.
We do not study history just for the sake of a certain amount of interesting information.
As Christians we have a very definite philosophy of history. For us history is the
realization of the purposes and plans of the all-sufficient God revealed through Christ in
Scripture. And if this is the case we are naturally persuaded that in history lies the best
proof of our philosophy of human life. The core of our system of philosophy is our belief
in the triune God of Scripture, and in what he has revealed concerning himself and his
purposes for man and his world.
1. Divisions Of The Subject
We shall deal with our subject in two main divisions; the first is epistemology, and
the second is metaphysics. In these two divisions the various divisions of any system of
philosophy can be treated. Every system of philosophy must tell us whether it thinks true
knowledge to be possible. Or if a system of philosophy thinks it impossible for man to
have a true knowledge of the whole of reality or even of a part of reality, it must give
good reasons for thinking so. From these considerations, it follows that if we develop our
reasons for believing that a true knowledge of God and, therefore, also of the world, is
possible because actually given in Christ, we have in fact given what goes in philosophy
under the name of epistemology. It will then be possible to compare the Christian
epistemology with any and with all others. And being thus enabled to compare them all,
we are in a position and placed before the responsibility of choosing between them. And
this choosing can then, in the nature of the case, no longer be a matter of artistic
preference. We cannot choose epistemologies as we choose hats. Such would be the case
if it had been once for all established that the whole thing is but a matter of taste. But that
is exactly what has not been established. That is exactly the point in dispute.
In the second place, every system of philosophy has a theory of metaphysics. The
term metaphysics is often used to define a rather narrow discipline in the field of human
knowledge. The term is then used in distinction from psychology, physics, etc., to
indicate that in metaphysics we deal with the most ultimate concepts of reality only. In
distinction from this narrow use of the term metaphysics, there is a broader use. In that
broader sense we employ the term in this syllabus. We mean by metaphysics, then, a
complete theory of reality. The mistake should not be made, however, of thinking that we
shall attempt to give a detailed philosophy of all branches of human knowledge. On the
contrary, as the word metaphysics suggests when used in the narrower sense, we shall
have to do only with the most ultimate concepts of human thought. We shall even limit
ourselves, almost exclusively, to the concept of God. But the definite understanding will
be that our concept of God has specific implications for every branch of human
knowledge. Therefore, when we have established our belief in the Christian conception of
God, we have, in principle at least, also established our belief in a definite theory of the
universe and of man. This point is forgotten again and again in our day. People all too
thoughtlessly accept theories of man and of the universe that are altogether out of
harmony with their own theory about God. They forget that a Christian conception of
God demands a Christian conception of the universe.
It should be noted further that, as in epistemology so in metaphysics, the matter of a
choice comes up again. We shall find that the Christian theory of metaphysics is the only
one that really takes the matter of metaphysics seriously. For the others it has really
become a question of taste. The one takes to one type of thing, and the other takes to
another type of thing, they say, and it really does not make much difference which one
you hold to. The conviction at the basis of such an attitude must be that it is rationally
impossible for man to have any knowledge of ultimate things. It will be necessary for us
to insist that our opponents make reasonable to us this claim that man can have no
knowledge of ultimate things. Unless they are able to do this they have no right to their
attitude of carelessness. So then, we are necessarily led once more into a dialogue.
We may further observe that in these two divisions of epistemology and metaphysics
we deal from a philosophical point of view with that which theology deals with from a
theological point of view. The six divisions of systematic theology—theology,
anthropology, Christology, soteriology, ecclesiology, and eschatology—are all included
in our theory of reality or metaphysics. Philosophy deals with no concepts that theology
does not deal with. It is but a matter of terminology. We emphasize this point because a
minister of the gospel should not be in jeopardy every hour lest his theological structure
crumble to the ground because of advances in the fields of science and philosophy of
which he knows nothing or very little. He should rather realize that in his presentation of
biblical truth he has dealt with all the concepts that any human being can possibly deal
with. Not as though he can pose as a scientist or a philosopher in the technical sense of
the term. It is not necessary for him to be able to do so. He has a right to feel confident
that there are no unknown trenches from which the enemy may suddenly pounce upon
him. Now this is exactly what may be one of the chief benefits of a course in metaphysics
for a theological student. In it he ought to learn that his opponents have exhausted
themselves in trying to find a solution for the problems with which he is dealing, and
have found no such solution. He ought to see the limits of their thought. He ought to
examine the tools with which they labor. He ought to survey the field upon which they
operate. If he does this thoroughly he will return with confidence to the propagation of
his own position, or if he should feel inclined to reject it, he would at least do it
intelligently.
Chapter 1:
Epistemological Terminology
1. Revelation
According to Scripture, God has created the “universe.” God has created time and
space. God has created all the “facts” of science. God has created the human mind. In this
human mind God has laid the laws of thought according to which it is to operate. In the
facts of science God has laid the laws of being according to which they function. In other
words, the impress of God’s plan is upon his whole creation.
We may characterize this whole situation by saying that the creation of God is a
revelation of God. God revealed himself in nature and God also revealed himself in the
mind of man. Thus it is impossible for the mind of man to function except in an
atmosphere of revelation. And every thought of man when it functioned normally in this
atmosphere of revelation would express the truth as laid in the creation by God. We may
therefore call a Christian epistemology a revelational epistemology.
2. Analysis And Synthesis
We must now seek to define this revelational epistemology more closely by relating it
still more definitely to the conception of him who gives the revelation. The all-important
question is what kind of a God reveals himself. Pantheistic thinkers also speak of God
revealing himself and might therefore also speak of a revelational epistemology if they
desired. But for the sake of clearness, the term revelation should really be reserved for
biblical thought. According to this view God has been, and is, eternally self-conscious.
There is no fringe of ignorance or darkness in him.
3. Correspondence
It is this concept of a completely self-conscious God that is all-important in
epistemology. This appears at once from the implications of such a concept for the fact of
human knowledge.
True human knowledge corresponds to the knowledge which God has of himself and
his world. Suppose that I am a scientist investigating the life and ways of a cow. What is
this cow? I say it is an animal. But that only pushes the question back. What is an animal?
To answer that question I must know what life is. But again, to know what life is I must
know how it is related to the inorganic world. And so I may and must continue till I reach
the borders of the universe. And even when I have reached the borders of the universe, I
do not yet know what the cow is. Complete knowledge of what a cow is call be had only
by an absolute intelligence, i.e., by one who has, so to speak, the blueprint of the whole
universe. But it does not follow from this that the knowledge of the cow that I have is not
true as far as it goes. It is true if it corresponds to the knowledge that God has of the cow.
From this presentation of the matter, it is clear that what we mean by correspondence
is not what is often meant by it in epistemological literature. In the literature on the
subject, correspondence usually means a correspondence between the idea I have in my
mind and the “object out there.” In the struggle between the “realists” and the “subjective
idealists” this was the only question in dispute. They were not concerned about the
question uppermost in our minds, i.e., whether or not God has to be taken into the
correspondence. We may call our position in epistemology a Correspondence Theory of
Truth, if only we keep in mind that it is opposed to what has historically been known
under that name.
4. Coherence
In opposition to the historical correspondence theory of truth there arose in the Kant-
Hegel tradition the so-called Coherence Theory of Truth. The Idealists argued in the way
that we have argued above about the cow. They said that true knowledge cannot be
obtained by a mere correspondence of an idea of the mind to all object existing apart
from the mind. The mind and the object of which it seeks knowledge are parts of one
great system of reality and one must have knowledge of the whole of this reality before
one has knowledge of any of its parts. Accordingly, the Idealists said that the thing that
really counted in knowledge was the coherence of any fact with all other facts. To know
the place of a fact in the universe as a whole is to have true knowledge. This position, as
we shall see more fully later, approaches, in form, what we are after in our position. Yet
it is only in form that it approaches our position. That this is true can be seen from the
determining fact that the Absolute to which the Idealist seeks to relate all knowledge is
not the completely self-conscious God of Christianity. We cannot prove this point here.
We only state it as our conviction here in order to clear the ground. The Absolute of
Idealism, we believe, is not really an absolute because he exists as merely correlative to
the space-time world. Accordingly there are new facts arising for him as well as for us.
God becomes a primus inter pares, a One among others. He can no longer be the standard
of human knowledge.
It is our contention that only the Christian can obtain real coherence in his thinking. If
all of our thoughts about the facts of the universe are correspondence with God’s ideas of
these facts, there will naturally be coherence in our thinking because there is a complete
coherence in God’s thinking. On the other hand we hold that the Idealistic coherence
theory of truth cannot lead to coherence because it omits the source of all coherence,
namely, God.
In a way it might be well for us to call our position the Coherence Theory of Truth
because we claim to have true coherence. Whether we call our position a correspondence
theory or whether we call it a coherence theory, we have in each case to distinguish it
sharply from the theories that have historically gone by these names. Accordingly, the
determining factor must be a consideration of that which is most fundamental in our
theory of correspondence or of coherence. Now this depends upon the question whether
we have God’s knowledge in mind first of all, or whether we begin with human
knowledge. For God, coherence is the term that comes first. There was coherence in
God’s plan before there was any space-time fact to which his knowledge might
correspond, or which might correspond to his knowledge. On the other hand, when we
think of human knowledge, correspondence is of primary importance. If there is to be
true coherence in our knowledge there must be correspondence between our ideas of facts
and God’s ideas of these facts. Or rather we should say that our ideas must correspond to
God’s ideas. Now since we are dealing with opponents who speak of human knowledge
almost exclusively, we can perhaps best bring out the distinctiveness of our position by
calling it the Correspondence Theory of Truth. An additional reason for this choice is that
at the present time the old correspondence theory has pretty well died down, leaving the
coherence theory in control of the field. Hence we have the advantage of a different name
from the current name, since we are interested in making it clear that we really have a
different theory from the current theory.
5. Objectivity
Another term that needs description before we can proceed with our historical survey
is that of “objectivity.” In ordinary speech we understand by an “object” anything that
exists “out there,” that is, independently of the human mind. We then claim to have
objective knowledge of something if the idea that we have in our minds of that thing
corresponds to the thing as it exists independently of the mind. We may have false ideas
about a thing. In that case we say that it is only subjective and does not correspond to
reality. The controversy between Berkeley and his opponents hinged on the point whether
or not there are objects “out there” to which our knowledge corresponds. Berkeley said
that to be is to be perceived. He said, therefore, that all knowledge is subjective only. His
opponents maintained the contrary. Johnson is said to have tried to refute Berkeley by
kicking against a stone.
The coherence theory of truth implied a new conception of objectivity. For it,
objectivity no longer was the correspondence of an idea to a certain object supposed to
exist in total independence of the mind. For it, objectivity meant a significant reference to
the whole system of truth. One would have a true idea of a cow not by having a replica of
the cow in one’s mind, but by understanding the place of the cow in the universe.
Now it will be readily understood that as far as the form of the matter is concerned
the Christian conception of objectivity stands closer to the latter than to the former
position. For us, too, the primary question is not that of the out-thereness of the cow.
What we are chiefly concerned about is that our idea of the cow shall correspond to
God’s idea of the cow. If it does not, our knowledge is false and may be called subjective.
But the exact difference between the Idealistic conception of objectivity and ours should
be noted. The difference lies just here, that, for the Idealist, the system of reference is
found in the Universe inclusive of God and man, while for us, the point of reference is
found in God alone.
When therefore we examine the various epistemological views with regard to their
“objectivity,” we are interested most of all in knowing whether or not these views have
sought the knowledge of an object by placing it into its right relation with the self-
conscious God. The other questions are interesting enough in themselves but are
comparatively speaking not of great importance. Even if one were not anxious about the
truth of the matter, it ought still to be plain to him that there can be no more fundamental
question in epistemology than the question whether or not facts can be known without
reference to God. Suppose for argument’s sake that there is such a God. And surely the
possibility of it anybody ought to be willing to grant unless he has proved the
impossibility of God’s existence. Suppose then the existence of God. Then it would be a
fact that every fact would be known truly only with reference to him. If then one did not
place a fact into relation with God, he would be in error about the fact under
investigation. Or suppose that one would just begin his investigations as a scientist,
without even asking whether or not it is necessary to make reference to such a God in his
investigations, such a one would be in constant and in fundamental ignorance all the
while. And this ignorance would be culpable ignorance, since it is God who gives him
life and all good things. It ought to be obvious then that one should settle for himself this
most fundamental of all epistemological questions, whether or not God exists. Christ says
that as the Son of God, he will come to judge and condemn all those who have not come
to the Father by him.
6. Method
Finally we must discuss the question of method. At this stage we are interested only
in seeing what sort of method of investigation is involved in Christianity. At the outset it
ought to be clearly observed that every system of thought necessarily has a certain
method of its own. Usually this fact is overlooked. It is taken for granted that everybody
begins in the same way with an examination of the facts, and that the differences between
systems come only as a result of such investigations. Yet this is not actually the case. It
could not actually be the case. In the first place, this could not be the case with a
Christian. His fundamental and determining fact is the fact of God’s existence. That is his
final conclusion. But that must also be his starting point. If the Christian is right in his
final conclusion about God, then he would not even get into touch with any fact unless it
were through the medium of God. And since man has, through the fall in Adam, become
a sinner, man cannot know and therefore love God except through Christ the Mediator.
And it is in Scripture alone that he learns about this Mediator. Scripture is the Word of
Christ, the Son of God and Son of man. No sinner knows anything truly except he knows
Christ, and no one knows Christ truly unless the Holy Ghost, the Spirit sent by the Father
and the Son, regenerates him. If all things must be seen “in God” to be seen truly, one
could look ever so long elsewhere without ever seeing a fact as it really is. If I must look
through a telescope to see a distant star, I cannot first look at the star to see whether there
is a telescope through which alone I could see it. If I must look through a microscope to
see a germ, I cannot first look at the germ with the naked eye to see if there is a
microscope through which alone I can see it. If it were a question of seeing something
with the naked eye and seeing the same object more clearly through a telescope or a
microscope, the matter would be different. We may see a landscape dimly with the naked
eye and then turn to look at it through a telescope and see it more clearly. But such is not
the case with the Christian position. According to it, nothing at all can be known truly of
any fact unless it be known through and by way of man’s knowledge of God.
But if it be readily granted that a Christian begins with a bias, it will not so readily be
granted that his opponents also begin with a bias. Yet this is no less the case. And the
reason for this is really the same as that given above in the case of the Christian. We may
again illustrate with our telescope analogy. The antitheist is one who has made up his
mind in advance that he will never look through a telescope. He maintains steadfast in his
conviction that there are some facts that can be known truly without looking through a
telescope. This much is implied in the very idea of starting to see whether there is a God.
It will be observed that even to say that there are some facts that can be known without
reference to God, is already the very opposite of the Christian position. It is not necessary
to say that all facts can be known without reference to God in order to have a fiat denial
of the Christian position. The contention of Christianity is exactly that there is not one
fact that can be known without God. Hence if anyone avers that there is even one fact that
can be known without God, he reasons like a non-Christian. It follows then that such a
person in effect rejects the whole of the Christian position, the final conclusions as well
as the starting point. And that means that such a person has at the outset taken for granted
that there is no God in whom alone “facts” can be known. In other words, such a person
has taken for granted that God is at least not such a “fact” that he is related to every other
“fact” so that no other fact can be understood without reference to the “fact” of God.
It was needful to make this point that every human being must necessarily begin with
a “bias” clear, at this stage, because it is often assumed that the real difference between
the traditionally Christian position and the ordinary philosophical and scientific methods
exists in the fact that the traditional position alone is prejudiced, while all others are
open-minded. It was necessary, too, to emphasize the universality of “prejudice” at this
point because it will thus become clear that when the Christian and his opponent use the
same terminology they do not mean the same things. Both speak of inductive, deductive
and transcendental methods, but each of them presupposes his own starting point, when
he uses these terms, and the fact gives these terms a different meaning in each case. It
follows from this too that what the Christian is opposing is not these methods, as such,
but the anti-Christian presuppositions at the base of them.
7. Knowledge
Which method fits with a certain system of thought depends upon the idea of
knowledge a system has. For the Christian system, knowledge consists in understanding
the relation of any fact to God as revealed in Scripture. I know a fact truly to the extent
that I understand the exact relation such a fact sustains to the plan of God. It is the plan of
God that gives any fact meaning in terms of the plan of God. The whole meaning of any
fact is exhausted by its position in and relation to the plan of God. This implies that every
fact is related to every other fact. God’s plan is a unit. And it is this unity of the plan of
God, founded as it is in the very being of God, that gives the unity that we look for
between all the finite facts. If one should maintain that one fact can be fully understood
without reference to all other facts, he is as much antitheistic as when he should maintain
that one fact can be understood without reference to God.
8. Implication
From this conception of knowledge it will appear which method a Christian would
naturally be bound to use. That method we may perhaps best designate as the method of
implication. What we seek to do in our search for understanding the universe is to work
ourselves ever more deeply into the relations that the facts of the universe sustain to God.
That is, we seek to implicate ourselves more deeply into a comprehension of God’s plan
in and with every fact that we investigate. Suppose that I am a biologist, studying the
color of certain frogs. In order to do so, I must seek to know all about flogs in general. I
must have some conception about the species as a whole, before I can intelligently study
the individual. Or if I am studying some animal about which no information is available
from the records of science, it is still necessary that I have a theory about animal life in
general, in order to engage in fruitful research. Thus in starting any investigation the
general precedes the particular. No one without any general notion about animal life
would ever think of investigating a point of detail. Then when I continue my
investigation, I must seek to relate this particular frog to other frogs, then the frogs to
other animal life, and then animal life as such to human life, and human life to the
conception of God that I have. Now this approach from the bottom to the top, from the
particular to the general is the inductive aspect of the method of implication. The greater
the amount of detailed study and the more carefully such study is undertaken, the more
truly Christian will the method be. It is important to bring out this point in order to help
remove the common misunderstanding that Christianity is opposed to factual
investigation. That the opponents of Christianity are still seeking to spread this
misunderstanding may be seen, for instance, from such a book as that of Stewart G. Cole,
The History of Fundamentalism. Throughout the book it is stated time and again that the
believers in the traditionally Christian position are opposed to the spread of the
knowledge of all the facts discovered by science. Now it were a great deal better for
Liberalism itself if it were willing to fight openly and admit that the whole fight is one
about two mutually opposite philosophies of life, instead of about the hiding or non-
hiding of certain facts.
9. Deduction And Induction
Then, corresponding to the inductive aspect of the method of implication is the
deductive aspect. We may define this as the control of the general over the particular. Our
conception of God controls the investigation of every fact. We are certain, as certain as
our conviction of the truth of the entire Christian position, that certain “facts” will never
be discovered. One of these, for example, is “the missing link.” The term “missing link”
we take in its current meaning of a gradual transition from the non-rational to the rational.
As such, it is an anti-Christian conception, inasmuch as it implies that the non-rational is
more ultimate than the rational. At least the anti-Christian wants to leave the question of
the relative ultimacy of the rational to the non-rational an open question, while the
Christian can never afford to do this. For the Christian, it is a settled and not an open
question. And this difference between the Christian and his opponents comes to the lore
in the method of investigation of facts. The anti-Christian holds that any sort of fact may
appear. He thinks this to be one of the most important requirements of a truly scientific
attitude. On the other hand, the Christian holds that no fact will appear that could
disprove the ultimacy of the fact of God, and therefore of what he has revealed of himself
and his plan for the world through Christ in the Scriptures. We may illustrate this point
by the example of a mathematician who finds that three points are related to one another
by the arc of a circle. Then when he proceeds to draw the circle he follows a definitely
“prescribed” course, even if he has made no mark on his paper yet. If it is the circle that
relates the points, and if the circle exhausts the relation of the points, the mathematician
cannot reasonably expect to find other points on a tangent to the circle that are
nevertheless related to the points of the circle. Now we may compare the circle of the
mathematician to the Christian concept of God. We hold that the meaning of any one
finite fact is exhausted by its relation to the plan of God. Hence this same thing will hold
tot any two or three facts. And it follows that no other facts can stand in any possible
relation to these facts unless they too are related to this one comprehensible plan of God.
In other words, only Christian facts are possible. For any fact to be a fact at all, it must be
what Christ in Scripture says it is.
This is the main point in dispute between Christians and non-Christians. The
difference between the two does not only appear in the interpretation of facts after they
have been found, but even in the question what facts one may expect to find. And it does
not go without saying, as is all too often assumed, that the non-Christian is right in
looking for any kind of fact. If the Christian position should prove to be right in the end,
then the anti-Christian position was wrong, not only at the end, but already at the
beginning.
From the description given of the deductive and the inductive aspects of the method
of implication, it will now appear that what has historically been known by the deductive
and inductive methods are both equally opposed to the Christian method. By the
deductive method as exercised, e.g., by the Greeks, was meant that one begins his
investigations with the assumption of the truth and ultimacy of certain axioms, such as,
for example, that of causal relation. The question whether these axioms rest in God or in
the universe was in that case not considered to be of great importance. Not as though the
question was not raised. Plato did consider the question whether God was back of the
ideas or whether the ideas were back of God. Yet this question was not given the
importance that we give to it. We must put the point more strongly. The question was, in
effect, given the wrong answer. It was assumed that the true, the beautiful and the good
rest in themselves, and that God is subordinate to them. For us the question is all-
important. If the axioms on which science depends are thought of as resting in the
universe, the opposite of the Christian position is in effect maintained. The only
rationality they know of in the universe is then the mind of man. Hence the alternative
may be stated by saying that according to the Christian position, the basis of human
investigation is in God, while for the antitheistic position the basis of human investigation
is in man.
Similarly with the more modern method of induction. What is meant by induction as
a method of science is the gathering of facts without reference to any axioms, in order to
find to what these facts may lead us. Many scientists claim this method to be the method
of science. But we have already seen that the usual assumption underlying this method is
the antitheistic one, that there may be any kind of fact. Hence the difference between the
prevalent method of science and the method of Christianity is not that the former is
interested in finding the facts and is ready to follow the facts wherever they may lead,
while the latter is not ready to follow the facts. The difference is rather that the former
wants to study the facts without God, while the latter wants to study the facts in the light
of the revelation God gives of himself in Christ. Thus the antithesis is once more that
between those for whom the final center of reference in knowledge lies in man, and those
for whom the final center of reference for knowledge lies in God, as this God speaks in
Scripture.
Accordingly, we pay scant attention to the historic quarrel between the apostles of
deduction and the apostles of induction. Our quarrel is not with either of them in
particular but with both of them in general. To us the only thing of great significance in
this connection is that it is often found to be more difficult to distinguish our method
from the deductive method than from the inductive method. But the favorite charge
against us is that we are still bound to the past and are therefore employing the deductive
method. Our opponents are thoughtlessly identifying our method with the Greek method
of deduction. For this reason it is necessary for us to make the difference between these
two methods as clear as we can.
From our discussion it will also appear that even the method of implication, as
employed by Idealistic philosophy, is quite the opposite of ours. Here especially it is of
paramount importance to distinguish clearly. We have purposely chosen the name
implication for our method because we believe that it really fits in with the Christian
scheme, while it fits in with no other scheme. Hence we must take particular pains to note
that the method of implication as advocated especially by B. Bosanquet and other
Idealists, is really as fundamentally opposed to our method as is the method of ancient
deductivism and of modern inductivism. The difference is once more that we believe the
Idealists to have left God out of consideration.
10. A Priori And A Posteriori
Closely related to the terms inductive and deductive are the terms a posteriori and a
priori. The literal meaning of these terms is “from that which follows or is subsequent,”
and “from that which is before,” respectively. An a posteriori method is one that is
practically identical with the empirical or inductive method. The a priori method is
usually identified with the deductive method. We need only observe that a priori
reasoning, and a posteriori reasoning, are equally anti-Christian, if these terms are
understood in their historical sense. As such they contemplate man’s activity in the
universe but do not figure with the significance of God above the universe.
11. Transcendental
One more point should be noted on the question of method, namely, that from a
certain point of view, the method of implication may also be called a transcendental
method. We have already indicated that the Christian method uses neither the inductive
nor the deductive method as understood by the opponents of Christianity, but that it has
elements of both induction and of deduction in it, if these terms are understood in a
Christian sense. Now when these two elements are combined, we have what is meant by
a truly transcendental argument. A truly transcendental argument takes any fact of
experience which it wishes to investigate, and tries to determine what the presuppositions
of such a fact must be, in order to make it what it is. An exclusively deductive argument
would take an axiom such as that every cause must have an effect, and reason in a
straight line from such an axiom, drawing all manner of conclusions about God and man.
A purely inductive argument would begin with any fact and seek in a straight line for a
cause of such an effect, and thus perhaps conclude that this universe must have had a
cause. Both of these methods have been used, as we shall see, for the defense of
Christianity. Yet neither of them could be thoroughly Christian unless they already
presupposed God. Any method, as was pointed out above, that does not maintain that not
a single fact can be known unless it be that God gives that fact meaning, is an anti-
Christian method. On the other hand, if God is recognized as the only and the final
explanation of any and every fact, neither the inductive nor the deductive method can any
longer be used to the exclusion of the other. That this is the case can best be realized if
we keep in mind that the God we contemplate is an absolute God. Now the only
argument for an absolute God that holds water is a transcendental argument. A deductive
argument as such leads only from one spot in the universe to another spot in the universe.
So also an inductive argument as such can never lead beyond the universe. In either case
there is no more than an infinite regression. In both cases it is possible for the smart little
girl to ask, “If God made the universe, who made God?” and no answer is forthcoming.
This answer is, for instance, a favorite reply of the atheist debater, Clarence Darrow. But
if it be said to such opponents of Christianity that, unless there were an absolute God
their own questions and doubts would have no meaning at all, there is no argument in
return. There lie the issues. It is the firm conviction of every epistemologically self-
conscious Christian that no human being can utter a single syllable, whether in negation
or in affirmation, unless it were for God’s existence. Thus the transcendental argument
seeks to discover what sort of foundations the house of human knowledge must have, in
order to be what it is. It does not seek to find whether the house has a foundation, but it
presupposes that it has one. We hold that the anti-Christian method, whether deductive or
inductive, may be compared to a man who would first insist that the statue of William
Penn on the city hall of Philadelphia can be intelligently conceived of without the
foundation on which it stands, in order afterwards to investigate whether or not this statue
really has a foundation.
It should be particularly noted, therefore, that only a system of philosophy that takes
the concept of an absolute God seriously can really be said to be employing a
transcendental method. A truly transcendent God and a transcendental method go hand in
hand. It follows then that if we have been correct in our contention that Hegelian Idealism
does not believe in a transcendent God, it has not really used the transcendental method
as it claims that it has.
Now at this juncture it may be well to insert a brief discussion of the place of
Scripture in all this. The opponent of Christianity will long ago have noticed that we are
frankly prejudiced, and that the whole position is “biblicistic.” On the other hand, some
fundamentalists may have feared that we have been trying to build up a sort of Christian
philosophy without the Bible. Now we may say that if such be the case, the opponent of
Christianity has sensed the matter correctly. The position we have briefly sought to
outline is frankly taken from the Bible. And this applies especially to the central concept
of the whole position, viz., the concept of an absolute God. Nowhere else in human
literature, we believe, is the concept of an absolute God presented. And this fact is once
more intimately related to the fact that nowhere else is there a conception of sin, such as
that presented in the Bible. According to the Bible, sin has set man at enmity against
God. Consequently it has been man’s endeavor to get away from the idea of God, that is,
a truly absolute God. And the best way to do this was to substitute the idea of a finite
God. And the best way to accomplish this subordinate purpose was to do it by making it
appear as though an absolute God were retained. Hence the great insistence on the part of
those who are really anti-Christian, that they are Christian.
It thus appears that we must take the Bible, its conception of sin, its conception of
Christ, and its conception of God and all that is involved in these concepts together, or
take none of them. So also it makes very little difference whether we begin with the
notion of an absolute God or with the notion of an absolute Bible. The one is derived
from the other. They are together involved in the Christian view of life. Hence we defend
all or we defend none. Only one absolute is possible, and only one absolute can speak to
us. Hence it must always be the same voice of the same absolute, even though he seems
to speak to us at different places. The Bible must be true because it alone speaks of an
absolute God. And equally true is it that we believe in an absolute God because the Bible
tells us of one. 1
And this brings up the point of circular reasoning. The charge is constantly made that
if matters stand thus with Christianity, it has written its own death warrant as far as
intelligent men are concerned. Who wishes to make such a simple blunder in elementary
logic, as to say that we believe something to be true because it is in the Bible? Our
answer to this is briefly that we prefer to reason in a circle to not reasoning at all. We
hold it to be true that circular reasoning is the only reasoning that is possible to finite
man. The method of implication as outlined above is circular reasoning. Or we may call it
spiral reasoning. We must go round and round a thing to see more of its dimensions and
to know more about it, in general, unless we are larger than that which we are
investigating. Unless we are larger than God we cannot reason about him any other way,
than by a transcendental or circular argument. The refusal to admit the necessity of
circular reasoning is itself an evident token of opposition to Christianity. Reasoning in a
vicious circle is the only alternative to reasoning in a circle as discussed above.
In a rough general way we have in this chapter sought to define the terminology to be
used, and have therewith also sought to give something of a preliminary outline of the
Christian epistemology. It was necessary that we should do this before entering upon our
historical review so that we might have some standard by which to judge of history. For
even those who begin with the avowed purpose of letting history produce its own
standard, have in reality begun with a philosophy of history, namely, one that maintains
that history is in itself apart from God able to produce such a standard. Beside this, it was
necessary that we should justify our choice of historical material. We have said that, for
us, the question of the place given to the concept of God determines the value of a theory
of epistemology. Hence it is this question chiefly that we seek to answer in our historical
survey. But our opponents will think such a procedure an evident token of perdition. To
them the question of the position is not of primary importance. Accordingly, even this is
a controversial point on which one has to take sides at the outset. It is in itself a merit to
become aware at the outset of the intensely controversial character of every effort at
constructing a life-and-world view.
1
 In some of his recent publications—particularly in his work De Heilige Schrift, 1966–
1967—Dr. G. C. Berkouwer warns orthodox Christians against having a formal view of
Scripture. He stresses the fact that the content of biblical teaching and the idea of the
Bible are involved in one another. It is this point that the syllabus made in 1939.
A:GreekChapter 2:
Historical Survey:
Epistemology: Its StartingPoint
From a general point of view Greek philosophy always remains important. It is there
that the human mind has for the first time given systematic expression to its deepest
thought. Accordingly, any individual seeking to acquaint himself with an understanding,
even of modern philosophy, can well afford to spend a good share of the time at his
disposal on Greek philosophy.
From a more definite point of view, Greek philosophy is important to the student of
Christian theism. 1 In Greek philosophy, and in Greek philosophy only, has the
antitheistic mind fully expressed itself without the intermixture of semi-Christian
elements. It is of course true that the most comprehensive expositions of antitheistic
thought are found in such modern philosophers as Kant and Hegel. But it remains a fact
that in these and in all other writers an influence direct or indirect is felt that is foreign to
the genius of antitheistic thought. Hence the pivotal importance of Greek philosophy for
our purpose.
Still more important does Greek philosophy become for us if we remember that one
of the points of hottest debate between the theist and the antitheist is the question of a
starting point. Now it is in Greek philosophy alone that we can observe the way in which
all antitheist begins his investigations in the field of epistemology.
We are, moreover, especially fortunate in the fact that Greek speculation came to one
grand expression in the philosophy of one or two men, Plato and Aristotle. By common
consent no greater minds than these have arisen in the history of the human race. These
men have faced all the fundamental questions of epistemology. Thus we may claim to
have been fair to the whole antitheistic position if we have carefully investigated what
these men have said about the subject. The germs of all future antitheistic thought are
found in Plato and Aristotle.
But is it fair to bring the question of a theistic or an antitheistic starting point back to
the beginnings of Greek speculation? The commonest fashion of answering this question
would be to ask whether the Greeks said anything about theism and antitheism. And this
second question might easily be answered in the negative. Yet all will have to agree that
it is not necessary for the Greeks to have discussed the problem in the way in which we
moderns discuss it in order to have discussed it at all. If only the germs of the question
are present, it is fair for us to say that the Greeks had certain ideas about the question.
Now there are especially certain assumptions at the basis of Greek speculation that we
can point to, and on the basis of which we can determine the answer the Greeks would
have given to our question had it been put to them specifically.
It is of special importance to remark that we are of necessity dealing with
assumptions when we speak of Greek epistemology. Many would contend that at least the
1
 We now allow the terms theism, Christian theism, and the like to stand as they were
used in the “first edition.” They then stood for what God in his revelation through Christ
in the Scriptures tells about himself and his plan for man and his world.
earlier Greeks did not deal with epistemology but only with the problems of reality, or
what we, after Aristotle, call metaphysics. But since every metaphysics has an implicit, if
not an explicit, epistemology, it is not unfair to deal with the epistemology of even the
earliest Greeks. We may even say that every man educated or not educated has an
epistemology implied in his practice.
The specific question that we would ask then, with regard to the early Greeks, is,
“How did they conceive of the relation between the human and the divine mind?” And
the point of pivotal significance in this question is, which of these two minds, the human
or the divine, did the Greeks consider to be the more original and the more ultimate?
Could either the divine or the human mind operate efficiently without the other? Could
God know any of the facts of the universe without reference to man? Could man know
anything about any of the facts of the universe without reference to God? Were they
perhaps mutually dependent upon one another? Or were they perhaps mutually
independent of one another? Or if there was a dependence of the one upon the other, in
which direction was this dependence? Was God dependent on man, and not man on God?
Or was man dependent on God, and not God on man?
It should be noted that only if we could answer the last question in the affirmative
would we be justified in saying that the Greeks were theistic in their epistemology. The
ways of antitheism are many and the way of theism stands all alone and is very narrow.
But it would not be necessary for us to find a fully expressed system of theism among the
Greeks. We could be satisfied if only the beginnings of theistic speculation were found
among them.
The fact is, however, that we cannot even find a germ of true theistic speculation
among the Greeks. This may seem to be an extreme statement that requires justification.
Hence we must emphasize that we are not denying that there are in Greek thought many
references to God and that this God is even thought of as having a sort of independence
of the universe; but the important point to observe is that one can nowhere find the
conception of God as a self-sufficient and an absolutely independent God. It will of
course be urged against this assertion that the very fault of Greek speculation was that it
thought of God as too far abstracted from the world. Hence, it may be urged that if ally
people believed in a transcendent God, it was the Greeks. In answer to this we would say
that the transcendence concept of Greek philosophy is, especially in the case of Aristotle,
thought of as wholly independent of the universe, and therefore makes the universe
almost wholly independent of God. And it is this more than anything else that makes the
Greek concept of God basically antitheistic. Or if other interpreters of Greek thought
should wish to emphasize the closeness of the relation of the God of the Greeks to the
universe of the Greeks, and therefore claim that the God of the Greeks was immanent in
as well as transcendent above his creation, our reply is that it remains to be proved that
anyone of the Greeks ever thought of the universe as God’s creation. The term creation is
used, to be sure, but the connotation of the term creation in Greek philosophy is always
determined by the fact that the universe is thought of as having an eternal or semi-eternal
existence alongside of the existence of God. And if such is the creation concept of Greek
thought, it is impossible that the immanence of God in the universe could mean anything
else than a sort of identity with the universe. The God of Greek philosophy is either
exclusively deistic or exclusively pantheistic.
The transcendence concept of theism is not clearly stated, if it is merely said that God
is independent of the world. According to the ordinary use of the word, that would not
exclude the possibility that the world would also be independent of God. And it is this
dependence of the world upon God that a theist is interested in as much as the
independence of God apart from the world. In fact God would not be truly independent of
the world unless the world were dependent upon God. No one is absolutely independent
unless he alone is independent. There cannot be two absolutely independent beings.
Right here it may be urged that if we stress this point, human language will no longer
stand the strain we have put upon it. Independence, we are told, implies independence
from someone or from something, and therefore implies the existence of that someone or
something. But let us note that this is once more the point in dispute between the theist
and the antitheist. No more fundamental difference exists between the two than the
question touched upon in this objection. The entire Christian theistic position stands or
falls with the concept of the nature of the relation of God to man. It is not our purpose
here to argue the truth of the theistic position in detail. But it will help us to understand
the starting point of the Greeks if we do not obscure this difference between theism and
antitheism. Moreover, it will aid us if we realize that the objection voiced above that
human language implies the relativity of God and man is not something that is true as a
matter of course, but is an assumption on the part of antitheism that requires justification.
It is true that there is a great plausibility in the assumption. It is our everyday experience
that if we seek independence, we seek independence from someone or something that
actually exists. Hence it is very easy for us to carry over this idea into the field of
ultimate metaphysics and take for granted that the same principle must necessarily hold
there as it does in our commonest experiences. Yet this cannot be the case. If we maintain
that independence from something must always and for all intelligences alike imply the
existence of that from which the independence is contemplated, we can at most find place
for a God who has always been dependent upon the universe and upon the mind of man.
It would mean, consequently, the eternity of the universe and man, or it would mean the
temporality of God. The point is that God and man must in such a case always be kept in
close relativity to one another. Now we are not for the moment quarreling here with the
antitheist about these questions themselves, so much as with his naive attempt to put a
sweet capsule about the whole of his position in order to administer it to us at the outset
without our being aware of it. If we are to be antitheists, we should be self-conscious
antitheists.
The fundamental assumption made by the Greeks is the one just discussed. They are
interested in the objective world that is the world of physical objects first of all. They
paid very little attention to the question of the subject, that is the human mind, in the
early phases of their thought. Thus it may be contended that they did not even have any
epistemology and that it is therefore an anachronism to speak of an antitheistic
epistemology in their case. Yet in their very study of the objective world as we are
accustomed to call it, they took for granted that it was possible for them to know this
objective world without knowing whether or not God as creator was beyond the universe.
The majority, if not all, of the Pre-Socratics virtually identified God with the universe.
The questions studied were those of being and becoming. The assumptions underlying
these questions were (a) that all things are at bottom one, (b) that somehow the manifold
of experience comes out of the one, i.e., the fact of change is taken for granted: and (c)
that the manifold thus generated from the one is at all times identical with it. Thus if the
early Greeks used the term God at all it was practically synonymous with the term
universe. And since this is the case, it is clear that the question of the existence of a God
as creator of the universe was, in effect, given a negative answer. The Greeks assumed
that the human mind could know ally and all finite facts that it might ever expect to know
without any reference to God as creator. Thus they were unconsciously antitheistic, but
antitheistic none the less.
Paul tells us that God as creator is clearly revealed in the world. Calvin lays great
stress on this point. No fact in the world can be interpreted truly except it be seen as
created by God. The Greeks were among those of whom Paul speaks when he says that
they hinder or repress the truth in unrighteousness. The significance of the fact that Greek
speculation began with a definitely antitheistic bias cannot be stressed too much because
of the common misunderstanding on this score. The usual presentation is that the Greeks
naturally began to look around them at the physical universe and to ask questions about it
as a child asks questions about any strange or new thing that it sees. Hence, it is argued
that no more than you would accuse a child of starting with an antitheistic bias should
you accuse the Greeks of beginning with anything but an open mind. Naturally they
would begin with the things that were nearest to them, and only afterward could they pass
on to the more remote questions of metaphysics. They began with physics and thereupon
turned to metaphysics.
These objections, however, are themselves based upon the self-same antitheistic bias
noted above. In these objections it is taken for granted that the Greeks may fairly be
compared to children who begin to wonder about things around them. But this
comparison would be fair only if antitheism were true. The comparison presupposes that
the human race was for the first time emerging into self-consciousness in the persons of
the Greeks. The comparison takes for granted that the human race had never been in close
contact with a God who was nearer to them than the universe. In other words, the
comparison takes for granted that the physical facts would naturally be knowable first,
and that if God is to be known he must be known later.
But this is exactly the point in dispute. If the theistic view is true, then man was
originally as close to God as he was to any physical fact. If theism is true, man once
realized that fact that the animals and the trees were known to him because God was
known to him. If theism is true, the revelation of the absolute God was everywhere found
in the created universe, so that no matter where man would turn, to himself or to nature
about him, he would meet God. This is implied in the idea of creation. The idea of
creation carries with it a definite view of being and of becoming, the two main questions
of Greek philosophy. The idea of creation makes a distinction of being between God and
man. Anyone holding to the idea of creation (we speak of temporal and not of logical
creation) must also hold to the idea of a God who existed apart from the world and had
meaning for himself apart from the world. And this point goes counter to the first
assumption of Greek speculation spoken of, that all things are at bottom one. If theism is
right, all things are at bottom two, and not one. In the second place, anyone holding to the
idea of creation must also hold that the world of becoming cannot be taken for granted as
an ultimate with which as a given the human mind must begin its speculation. Being is
before becoming and independent of becoming. Thus the creation idea also runs counter
to the second and third assumptions of Greek philosophy, that the fact of change should
be taken for granted, and that the manifold generated from the one is all the while
identical with the one.
We should add that according to Scripture, God spoke to man at the outset of history.
In addition to revealing himself in the facts of the created universe, God revealed himself
in Words, telling man about what he should do with the facts of the universe. Since the
fall, all men, as fallen in Adam, (Rom 5:12) continue to be responsible for this twofold
revelation of God given to man at the beginning of history.
From these considerations it follows that if theism is true the Greeks are not a race of
innocent children just beginning to look around in the world. If theism is true, there has
been an original monotheism or, as we may now say, an original theism from which the
race has fallen away. This truth is usually given no more serious thought than one of the
myths of the Greeks. In fact it is usually regarded as being nothing but a myth to which
none but the hopeless traditionalists will pay any attention. Even Christians themselves
often feel as though this creation story is something they must carry along in order to
have the other advantages of theism, but something which in itself is of no importance.
For this reason we have sought to point out that the creation idea is an integral part of the
Christian theistic system of thought. We accept it because it is in the Bible, and we
believe that which is in the Bible to be the only defensible philosophical position. Our
opponents have no right to reject the creation story unless they can prove that it is not
essential to Christianity or that Christianity is not the only position that makes human
predication intelligible. Yet the ordinary textbook on philosophy presents the beginning
of Greek speculation as something entirely neutral. But to try to be neutral is to speak
against God and his Christ.
1. Neutrality
If the theistic position be defensible it is an impossibility for any human being to be
neutral. This is quite readily admitted when a centrally religious question is discussed.
We need only recall the words of Jesus, “He that is not against me is for me,” to remind
ourselves of this fact. When two nations are at war no citizens of either of these two
nations can be neutral. It may be reasonable for citizens of a third nation to be neutral, but
this cannot be the case for citizens of countries actually at war. We may apply this
analogy to the relation between theism and antitheism. Of course the applicability of such
an analogy will at once be denied by every redblooded antitheist. But this very fact shows
that it is a point in dispute between the two systems of thought, for it is equally true that
every redblooded theist will affirm that there is a definite warfare between the two. True,
the antitheist may speak of a war and of a clash of opinions, but what he means by war is
not to be identified with the theist’s conception of war. The antitheist cannot, because of
the very doctrines that he holds, consider it a matter of the greatest importance which
system of thought one feels inclined to embrace. Certainly for him there are no eternal
destinies of men involved. For a Christian theist the entire outlook is different. For him it
is as important that men should be theists as that they should be Christians, for the
obvious reason that for him a true theism and a true Christianity are identical. Hence a
true theist is always a missionary, even when engaged in the most “abstruse” speculations
about eternal things. A Christian will engage in no speculation. He has no “metaphysics”
as metaphysics is usually understood. He does not even start his thinking with God as his
master-concept in order to deduce his “system” of truth from this master concept. His
thinking is always and only an attempt to integrate the various aspects of biblical
teaching. In doing so he is deeply conscious of the fact that every “concept” he employs
must be limited by every other “concept” he employs, and that therefore his “system” is
an effort to restate in his confession the truth as it is in Jesus.
From these considerations it ought to be evident that one cannot take the possibility of
neutrality for granted. To be philosophically fair, the antitheist is bound first of all to
establish this possibility critically before he proceeds to build upon it. If there is an
absolute God, neutrality is out of the question, because in that case every creature is
derived from God and is therefore directly responsible to him. And such a God would not
feel very kindly disposed to those who ignore him. Even in human relationships it is true
that to be ignored is a deeper source of grief to him who is ignored than to be opposed. It
follows then that the attempt to be neutral is part of the attempt to be antitheistic. For this
reason we have constantly used the term antitheistic instead of nontheistic. To be
nontheistic is to be antitheistic. The narrative of the fall of man may illustrate this point.
Adam and Eve were true theists at the first. They took God’s interpretation of themselves
and of the animals for granted as the true interpretation. Then came the tempter. He
presented to Eve another, that is, an antitheistic theory of reality, and asked her to be the
judge as to which was the more reasonable for her to accept. And the acceptance of this
position of judge constituted the fall of man. That acceptance put the mind of man on an
equality with the mind of God. That acceptance also put the mind of the devil on an
equality with God. Before Eve could listen to the tempter she had to take for granted that
the devil was perhaps a person who knew as much about reality as God knew about it.
Before Eve could listen to the tempter, she had to take it for granted that she herself
might be such an one as to make it reasonable for her to make a final decision between
claims and counter-claims that involved the entire future of her existence. That is, Eve
was obliged to postulate an ultimate epistemological pluralism and contingency before
she could even proceed to consider the proposition made to her by the devil. Or,
otherwise expressed, Eve was compelled to assume the equal ultimacy of the minds of
God, of the devil, and of herself. And this surely excluded the exclusive ultimacy of God.
This therefore was a denial of God’s absoluteness epistemologically. Thus neutrality was
based upon negation. Neutrality is negation.
This negation was bound to issue in a new affirmation of the supremacy of the human
mind over the divine mind. Eve did not ask God, let alone her husband, to decide the
issue placed before her. When there are claims and counter-claims someone must assume
the role of absolute ultimacy. Eve was definitely placed before an “either or” alternative.
Of course she would have denied this if you had told her so at the time. She would have
resented being placed before any such alternative. She naturally thought that the issue
was not irrevocable, but that she could experiment with the Satanic attitude for a while,
and if it did not seem to work she could turn back to her old position of theism again. She
thought that evil or sin was at the worst a stepping-stone to higher things, and that she
could do all the stepping herself. In all this she was quite wrong. Whether she liked it or
not she was, as a matter of fact, standing before an exclusive alternative. Only an action
proceeding from the bosom of the eternal could place her on the right track again. It was
God who had to reinterpret her deed and place it in its true setting in the universe. And
this reinterpretation by God was a reversal of the interpretation given by man. Man had to
be brought back to God. This in itself is proof sufficient that the decision on the part of
man was antitheistic and not merely nontheistic.
The devil insinuated the idea that an intelligent and decisive interpretation can be
made only if reality is purely contingent. God cannot exist and be your creator, for if he
did, your choices would be those of a puppet. Don’t let the abstract or formal idea of an
all-controlling providence of God control your thought. Stand up for your rights as a free
person. This was, in effect, Satan’s argument.
When Eve listened to the tempter, she therefore not only had to posit an original
epistemological pluralism, but also an original metaphysical pluralism. She had to take
for granted that as a time created being she could reasonably consider herself to be
sufficiently ultimate in her being, so as to warrant an action that was contrary to the will
of an eternal being. That is, she not only had to equalize time and eternity, but she had to
put time above eternity. It was in time that Satan told her the issue was to be settled. He
said that it still remained to be seen whether God’s threats would come true. The
experimental method was to be employed. Only time could tell. This attitude implied that
God was no more than a finite God. If he were thought of as absolute, it would be worse
than folly for a creature of time to try out the interpretation of God in the test tube of
time. If he were thought of as eternal, such an undertaking was doomed to failure,
because in that case history could be nothing but the expression of God’s will. And in
that case man’s humanity would be destroyed.
It is true that this story of man’s fall is cast away as a relic of a mythological age by
the average student of philosophy. But surely this is unjust. The question is not merely
one of the historicity of the book of Genesis. It is that, but it is also more than that. The
whole philosophy of theism is involved in it. Anyone rejecting the Genesis narrative must
also be prepared to reject the idea of an absolute God. The history includes the
philosophy, and the philosophy includes the history. Or we may say that those who reject
the Genesis narrative begin their investigation of Greek philosophy with a definite
antitheistic bias. It is only because they are themselves not neutral, that they claim the
Greeks to have been neutral. It is an example of identification of neutrality with a
fundamental antitheistic bias. And as Christian theists we do not at all wonder at this. It is
just what we would expect. The fact that present-day antitheistic philosophers seem to be
totally unaware of their bias, and constantly insist that their starting point is that of
neutrality, is itself the best possible proof of the complete control the bias has of them. In
other words, the amazement with which the average student of philosophy or science
looks at you if you dare to tell him that, according to your conviction, neutrality is not
only undesirable but impossible, is sufficient proof that he has never questioned the
reasonableness or the possibility of neutrality. Then the more necessary it is that we
challenge this colossal assumption at the outset when it is applied to the study of the
Greeks.
2. Evil
It is at this irreducible epistemological level that we must face the question of error as
a whole. We have already spoken of it by implication in our discussion of the
impossibility of neutrality. But the antitheist will continue to urge that it was natural for
the Greeks that they should make mistakes in their investigation, and that we should not
expect them to appear at once with a full-fledged theism. Even if they were to come to
the theistic position at the end, they had to find their way and therefore had to be given
time.
The assumption at the basis of this objection is that the Greek mind was the normal
human mind. Yet this is not the case if the Christian theistic interpretation as a whole is
tenable. In that case the Greek mind was a manifestation of the human mind as it has
become abnormal through sin. Antitheistic thought identifies sin and finite limitation. It
takes for granted that because man is a limited being he could not at once have a
satisfactory knowledge of God. Consequently the many mistakes man made in his search
for God are not regarded as sinful but as entirely normal. The analogy of the child that is
beginning to learn is once more employed. But according to theism there can be no such
identification of the finite and the sinful or evil. According to theism original man,
though finite, was not sinful. Consequently he had at the outset a true and adequate
knowledge of God. 2 His finite limitations in no way prevented him from having such
adequate knowledge. The very possibility of error presupposes the existence of truth.
Now if we have not been in error in stating that this theory of error is involved in the
very bedrock of theism, it follows that the responsibility rests upon those who wish to
claim a neutral starting point for the Greeks that they first disprove the whole of the
theistic position. The theistic theory of evil has something very definite to say about the
beginnings of Greek speculation. And that which it has to say ought to be refuted by a
reasoned argument, instead of by ridicule and assumption. Until an effort is made in that
direction it will not be considered arrogant on our part if we cling to our interpretation of
the beginnings of Greek philosophy.
2
 By adequate we do not mean comprehensive. We mean sufficient for his needs as a
creature.
Chapter 3:
Historical Survey:
B: Greek Epistemology: Its Climax
We have thus far been speaking of the beginnings of Greek philosophy. Under that
general heading it was necessary also to look at the questions of neutrality and evil. It
remains now to look at the highest development of Greek thought as far as it has bearing
upon our subject.
In order to reach our goal, it will not be essential that we review every one of the
Greek philosophers in order to see what they have to say on the subject of epistemology.
We are not interested in the historical development of Greek epistemology except insofar
as it throws light on the highest spot reached by Plato and Aristotle. And of these two
philosophers we shall consider Plato rather than, or at least more than, Aristotle. The
reason for this is that we are chiefly interested in knowing what the Greek genius has to
say on the place of the human mind in the universe, and this may be more easily
ascertained from a study of Plato than from a study of Aristotle. And even if we are
mistaken on this point, it is of no great moment. No one will gainsay that a study of Plato
gives a fair crosscut of Greek thought. An advantage that is certainly gained by taking
Plato rather than Aristotle is that Plato has more often been hailed as a forerunner of
Christianity than Aristotle has. To be sure, the Roman church has placed Aristotle above
Plato, but we shall deal with this claim at a later stage. We are at this point more
concerned with such claims as those made by Paul Elmer More to the effect that Plato has
furnished the true foundation for Christianity. Prof. More thinks that there is a great
difference between the philosophy of Plato and that of Aristotle. The philosophy of Plato,
he maintains, stands for a dualism, and as such has much in common with Christianity,
while the philosophy of Aristotle ran amuck in an attempt at a unified metaphysics. We
shall not attempt to estimate the difference between Plato and Aristotle as found by Prof.
More. We have no quarrel with him on his interpretation of Plato. We hold that both
Plato and Aristotle stood diametrically opposed to Christianity, and that it is out of the
question to speak of Christianity having developed out of either of their philosophies.
This does not deny the fact that Greek thought in general and the philosophy of Plato and
Aristotle in particular has been of great formal value to Christianity. Nor do we mean to
intimate that Christianity has, in many of its exponents, not actually been influenced by
the pagan motif. But the genius of Christianity is a reversal of the genius of the Greeks.
It is to Plato’s doctrine of the soul that we must turn to find what may be called the
high-water mark of Greek epistemological speculation. In it we have before us the ripest
fruits of Greek speculation on the place of man’s mind in the universe. If anyone should
wish to maintain that we should go to the categories of Aristotle instead of to the Platonic
doctrine of the soul in order to have a fair sample as well as the high-water mark of Greek
speculation on epistemology we have no quarrel with him. Paul Elmer More has already
proved the great gulf that lies between Christianity and Aristotelianism. We are now
interested in showing that the self-same gulf exists between Christianity and Platonism.
To prepare the ground for an understanding of Plato’s doctrine of the soul, we must
recall certain general aspects of his philosophy. In the first place we should bear in mind
that all of Plato’s predecessors, with the possible exception of Socrates, were materialistic
or at least hylozoistic in their conceptions of the human soul. 1
Thales identified the inherent principle of change in nature with the human soul. 2
Little distinction was made between the soul and the body. Heraclitus does say that
thought was the most important attribute of the soul in distinction from the functions of
the body. But even so Heraclitus does not distinguish between the soul of the universe
around man and the soul within man. They are taken for granted as being of a piece with
one another. Even the “nous” of Anaxagoras does not introduce the idea of spirituality.
Something must be done, says Adamson, in the way of forming a notion of incorporeality
that does not exclude materiality, in order to understand what the early Greeks meant by
the soul. It is well to remember this background of Plato. Plato himself did not escape its
influence. None of the ancients learned to think of the individual human soul in clear
distinction from the material universe as a whole. It is this objective tendency, as it may
be called, if “objective” is understood in the popular sense of the term, that makes it so
difficult for us moderns who are accustomed to an emphasis on the individual human
soul, to understand the position of the Greeks.
In the second place it should be remarked that Greek philosophy as a whole tends to
depersonalization and abstraction. Not as though this was consciously the case. It could
not have been done consciously because the modern concept of personality was unknown
to the Greeks. What is meant is that though there was in the instance of Plato an advance
from materiality to spirituality this was itself abstractly understood. One aspect of the
universe is thought of as material and the other aspect is thought of as spiritual, and the
soul finds its home in the spiritual aspect. But of this spiritual aspect of the universe, the
soul is at most an individuation. Paul Elmer More has argued at length that abstraction
first set in with Aristotle, but it may be doubted whether he has made his point. It was
characteristic of the genius of the Greek mind to run into abstractions. It is inherent in all
apostate thought to think abstractly.
A third general remark to be made is that Greek thought in general was
intellectualistic. The emotional and volitional aspects of man are given scant attention.
The essence of the soul is found in the contemplation of the “Ideas.” Plato was firmly
convinced that the world of sense is not the most real world. It has its reality, to be sure.
But its reality was adequately known through the senses. The more real world was the
world of Ideas, and that could not be known through the senses; it had to be known
through contemplation by the mind.
It will be found upon careful scrutiny that all three of these characteristics just
enumerated (a) a tendency to identification of the human mind with the laws of the
universe as a whole, (b) a tendency toward depersonalization and abstraction, and (c) a
tendency toward intellectualism, will be found to be characteristic of all non- or
antitheistic thought. We shall attempt to point this out at a later stage. And if this opinion
is correct it is apparent that it will repay us to see these principles in operation in the case
of Plato.
1
 cf. E. Caird, Evolution of Theology in Greek Philosophy; R. K. Gaye, Platonic
Immortality; Adamson, The Development of Greek Philosophy, etc.
2
 cf. Aristotle, De Anima 1, 411, a, 7.
We may now turn to note the development of the Platonic doctrine of the soul in the
various dialogues.
The “Symposium” is the first dialogue in which the doctrine of a soul lost in the
contemplation of “ideas” is hinted at. In the allegory of Alcestis returning to earth there
seems to be an indication of the sort of immortality the ordinary Greek would desire. In
reward for the great love shown to her husband, Alcestis is allowed to return to earth
from the realm of Hades. It thus appears as though everlasting life upon the earth is the
best reward the Greek could think of. But it soon appears that this is impossible, if not
undesirable. Immortality, it is thought, must be something else. 3 There is a hint of a kind
of beings who are in their own natures immortal. Can we think of man as in his own
nature immortal? That is then the question asked. We have not been accustomed to do so.
But Diotema the inspired—for not even Socrates dares assume responsibility for such a
bold view—tells us that there may be some individuals among men who seem to be so
entirely different from the ordinary kind of men that they might seem to belong to
another race. These are the philosophers. They have all their lives spurned the mere
semblances of virtue and have held their eyes on high to study beauty and virtue itself.
Immortality upon earth in this world of sense would be a punishment, and not a reward,
for a being such as that. Nor would the perpetuation of the species be sufficient. The
lover may be satisfied with a particular beauty, but the philosopher must see ideal beauty
itself. He already sees it, not now and then, but continually. Yet he longs for the time
when nothing will obstruct his vision any more. He seems to realize that his citizenship is
in the world of eternal Ideas.
The form of the presentation here is metaphorical, but we can already see the
direction in which Plato’s thought is moving. The true nature of man is his soul, and not
his body. A dualism is developing. Moreover, the true nature of man is the intellect and
not the senses. Only through the intellect can man come into contact with the universals,
and these universal Ideas have more reality than the particulars of sense experience.
Another dualism is developing. The true function of man’s soul is contemplation of the
Ideas, and its highest destiny is separation from the world of sense in order to be wholly
absorbed in the contemplation of Ideas.
But Plato is bound to consider more thoroughly the suggestions offered by Diotema.
Perhaps Diotema has carried us as with a fiery chariot to heaven while we have forgotten
that we are but children of the dust. In the Phaedrus, then, Plato seeks to give a definite
demonstration of the validity of the idea of immortality. He comes to the conclusion that
Diotema was right. It is of the essence of man to be connected with the Ideal world. The
soul is considered immortal in its very nature and can for that reason expect immortality
in the sense of continued existence.
In the Phaedo this line of argument is pursued in still more detail. True knowledge is
of universals only, and it is the soul in its intellectual capacity that is fitted to come into
contact with this world.
Still we must not draw this argument too sharply. Even in the Protagoras, an early
dialogue, Plato has made Socrates admit that if virtue is teachable, there must be a stage
of learning. And this could not be the case if there is too sharp a separation between the
world of sense and the world of Ideas. In that case one either knows or does not know;
3
 Symposium, 208 A. B.
one is either in contact with the Ideal world and therefore in possession of it as
knowledge or one is a poor earthworm and knows nothing at all. Some reality must be
given to the world of sense inasmuch as learning seems to be possible. Perhaps the
indwelling of the soul in the body is not altogether in vain. Perhaps there is a closer
relation between soul and body than we are willing to admit. Perhaps even the fate of
both will be the same. At least the incarnation of the soul in the body has some meaning
for the world of sense.
The nasty problem why there should be an incarnation of the Ideas at all is not here
discussed. The Cur Deus Homo problem will meet us again and again. It has been and
still is a bone of contention between the two main opposing systems of thought. It is
especially charged that theism is here in desperate straits because it believes in an
absolute God who was self-sufficient. Such a God could, it is asserted, have no reason for
becoming incarnate or for creating any beings that were to exist outside himself, since he
was already self-sufficient. We only mention this matter here in order to call attention to
the fact that the greatest exponent of Greek thought had no solution to offer when he
came to consider this problem. Whether later antitheistic thought has found a solution
remains to be seen. Even in Plato’s maturest thought as expressed in the Timaeus, there is
only a faintest suggestion of the idea that it is perhaps the soul’s function to bring
together two opposing forces in the universe, namely, spirit and matter. And this lack of
any notion of reconciliation that at all approaches the Christian idea on that subject
corroborates what was said above about the assumption on the part of the Greeks, that the
mind of man is naturally sound. It is assumed that there is no reconciliation to be made
between God and man. And if there is any reconciliation to be made at all, it is the mind
of man that is to do the reconciling. Thus the mind of man does not need any
reconciliation to God by God, but it can itself reconcile the physical universe to God.
Instead of needing a Mediator, the mind of man sets itself up as mediator if there is to be
any mediator at all.
But we must return to the argument developed by Plato. What we have so far reached
is that, according to Plato, all soul is immortal This does not necessarily imply that every
soul is immortal. All soul, Plato thinks, is self-moved. And everything that is self-moved
is immortal. The human soul is not definitely proved to be immortal, but since it is
connected with the cosmic soul as a whole, it may reasonably be expected to be immortal
too. For suppose that the human soul should perish. Then there would be no guarantee
that the world-soul as a whole would not also perish.
It is of particular importance here to observe that the final basis of the argument is the
assumed eternity or at least endlessness of the existence of the universe. Plato nowhere
identifies time and eternity, but he does the next thing to it. For all practical purposes his
conception of time as “the moving image of eternity” amounts to saying that the eternal
and the temporal are equally ultimate aspects of one general Reality. When we say
“ultimate” here we do not mean that the temporal and the eternal were equally valuable in
the eyes of Plato. Quite the opposite is the case. The eternal is sometimes presented as
being the only valuable aspect of reality. But this does not change the fact that, according
to Plato, time and eternity are equally underived. Eternity is not derived from time, but
neither is time derived from eternity. And this is the fact that makes Plato’s position once
for all irreconcilable with any consistent interpretation of Christian theism.
We see then that the human soul is looked upon as a part of the temporal universe
which is not derived from eternity. In other words, the human mind is not derived from
God, and for that reason, as we shall find, is not, in the last analysis, responsible to God.
Hence the interpretation of the human mind is really as ultimate as the interpretation of
the divine mind. And it would inevitably follow that if then, there should arise a
difference of opinion between the human and the divine mind, the human mind would in
such a case have to act upon its own judgment, instead of upon the judgment of God. If
two are altogether agreed upon a course of action the question of priority need not arise.
But as soon as there is a difference of opinion, the question is bound to come up if
cooperation is to continue. And if cooperation is not to continue, it must be that
separation is possible. And the possibility of separation presupposes once more an
original independence.
Starting the argument from the other direction, we can say that the method of
reasoning employed by Plato involves an independence on the part of man in order to
have any meaning at all. Plato had to assume the underived character of the human mind
in order to assume the underived character of the whole of the temporal universe. It really
makes very little difference in this connection whether one begins with metaphysics and
ends with epistemology, or whether one begins with epistemology and ends with
metaphysics. The important thing to observe is that the one is involved in the other. The
assumed independence of the universe as a whole leads to, and implies, an original
independence on the part of the mind of man. On the other hand, the assumed
independence of the human mind leads to and implies an original independence of the
universe.
In passing, we would notice that if the Christian theistic position is true, Platonic
thought is the logical development of the thought of Eve after she yielded to the
temptation of the devil. Eve still had a struggle about the matter whether or not it was
wise to assume the equal ultimacy of God, the devil and man. Plato no longer had any
qualms of conscience on this question at all. In his time the human race had become so
well accustomed to the blindness of antitheism that it took for granted that there never
had been any other way of seeing, than with blind eyes. Or if this be considered too
strong a statement, and someone should wish to preserve such complete naivete as we
have attributed to Plato for the modern scientist, it is well. There is some reason for this.
Plato was still willing to attribute some possible meaning to the myths of which the
forefathers spoke. Paul Elmer More brings this out very nicely when he says that Plato
begins with Rationalism and ends with theology. What he intends to convey to us is that
Plato, of course, as a philosopher, begins by assuming that the human mind is capable of
meeting the riddles of the universe, but that when man sees more deeply into the
limitations of human thought he is willing to listen with some respect to those who claim
to have had revelations from the gods. Plato regarded the myths of an original golden era
as of only secondary importance, as something to which one might listen after one’s own
efforts at solution have failed. There might possibly be something to these myths after all.
The modern scientist, on the other hand, would of course not so much as listen to the
Genesis narrative of man’s original contact with God. In this respect Plato was less
extremely antitheistic than the modern scientist. Even so, the distance between Eve and
Plato was greater than the distance between Plato and the modern scientist. Plato had
reached the stage where antitheistic assumptions were already so deeply ingrained in the
human race, that no man of any intelligence questioned them any more.
Our interpretation of Plato may still further be corroborated by the argument followed
in the Phaedo. As in the “Meno,” so also in the Phaedo, the doctrine of “memory-
preexistence” is brought into relation with the doctrine of Ideas to indicate that the soul
was never temporally created but partakes of the Idea of Life, and for that reason, is
immortal. Ten must be considered greater than eight not by reason of two, but by reason
of greatness. Thus only can the gradation of the best be satisfied. So Plato’s chief
argument is here that the soul partakes of the Idea of life and therefore is immortal. Soul
is in intimate relation with Ideas but is not itself an Idea. “The very nature of soul consists
in its vision of true realities, the Ideas. The soul is akin with the Ideal realm, and through
its intimate connection therewith is immortal.” 4
A distinct element in the argument is the soul’s relation to the notion of change. There
were references to this in some of the dialogues we have discussed. The soul was in all
likelihood conceived as a principle of movement prior to the soul as the principle of
consciousness in Greek thought. We have, however, purposely reserved the discussion of
it to this point because here the two strands of thought are brought into the most intimate
connection with one another. Here too it can be most clearly seen what bearing this
conception of the soul as the principle of movement has upon the more directly
epistemological question of the soul as the principle of consciousness. A quotation from
Adamson will bring out our point. He says: “The point at which the connexion with the
Ideal realm is made most explicit is expressed by Plato as the relation of the soul and the
Idea of life: the soul is relatively to the Idea of life the concrete which participates in the
most abstract, in the Idea of life. What is the Idea of life? Nothing I conceive but the
abstract essence of change; or if that notion be thought too wide, of spontaneous change.”
5
 Here we strike the heart of the matter. The Idea of life partakes of the general
characteristics of all Ideas, namely, that it is eternal and self-existent. Now of this Idea of
life the soul is a concrete manifestation or particularization. The soul “participates” in the
Idea of life and is therefore underived. Thus far the argument is that with which we have
grown familiar from the previous considerations. The new element added is that the
notion of change is taken right into the realm of Ideas. The whole temporal world is
conceived as no more than a concrete particularization of the eternal world. Instead of
being a creature in a temporal world created by an eternal God, man is made the joint
creator with God of the temporal world. But even this does not express the matter with
entire correctness. There is really no creation at all. There is only one universe with two
aspects: the eternal and the temporal. The eternal somehow expresses itself in the
temporal and it is man who goes forth as the temporal appearance of the universe. Those
acquainted with theological terminology might compare the doctrine of the council of
peace on the part of the Trinity to the teaching of Plato on this score. Theology presents
the Father and the Son and the Spirit, the three coeternal persons of the Trinity, as
consulting about the problem of incarnation as it comes up in connection with the
question of evil. The Father sends the Son. Yet it can with equal propriety be said that the
Son goes of his own accord. The Father is no more ultimate than the Son. In Plato’s
4
 Adamson, The Development of Greek Philosophy, p. 116.
5
 Adamson, op. cit., p. 116.
thought man as such is, as it were, substituted for the second person in the Trinity. Man
as ultimate is as God; only it is he that appears in the temporal sphere and seems to be no
different from God. What the Chalcedon Creed confesses about the Theanthropos
identified with the person of Christ, Plato confesses about the theanthropos identified
with generic man. For orthodox Christianity it is Christ who “somehow” combines the
eternal and the temporal into a close union without intermixture. In the case of Plato’s
thought it is Man who “somehow” combines the eternal and the temporal by way of an
admixture.
Let us for a moment look at the threefold difference involved in the last sentence. The
first is that between generic man and the Mediator. If mankind as such performs the
function of Mediator, it will be impossible for any one man to be the Mediator. In the
second place, for Plato eternity and time are intermixed, while for Christian theism the
two natures of Christ are said to be without intermixture. The Platonic conception of the
relation between eternity and time makes it forever impossible that Christianity should
develop out of Platonism, as Mr. More contends that it has. The third difference lies
hidden in the word “somehow.” On the surface it would appear that on this point at least
Christianity and Platonism agree that both admit a final mystery in their philosophy. But
this is not the case. Platonism does and Christianity does not admit a final mystery in its
system. That this is a fair statement of the situation may be realized from the
consideration that the controlling concept of Christianity is the concept of an absolutely
self-conscious God. For such a God there could be no final mystery. When the church in
effect professes that in the person of Christ the eternal and the temporal are “somehow”
united, it only admits that human knowledge cannot fathom the difficulty involved. The
church at the same time affirms that in God the mystery is solved. Platonism on the other
hand must maintain that the divine mind as well as the human mind is surrounded with a
universe which neither of the two minds has penetrated or can penetrate. Hence the
mystery exists equally for God and man. If man finds himself confronted with an
insoluble mystery he has no right to appeal to a higher form of intelligence for which this
mystery does not exist. We shall see more fully later that here we have touched upon a
fundamental difference that is bound to reappear often.
The comparison we have made in the preceding paragraphs between pagan and the
Christian doctrines of incarnation may also be extended so as to compare the contrasting
notions of authority. Just as Platonism was bound to deny to any one person a distinct
position as Mediator, because man as such is considered to be the mediator, so also
Platonism is bound, to deny that any one man could ever claim absolute authority for
himself. In other words, it was a foregone conclusion that the Greek mind would reject
the gospel Paul preached. The first chapter of Corinthians brings out this point. Paul says
that the world by its wisdom—that is, by the effort of its own unaided intellect—had not
found God. To the Greek mind the gospel was foolishness because it implied that the
mind of the “natural man” is radically corrupt. Paul presented the gospel, not as a source
of wisdom in coordination with other sources, but as something before which men were
to bow as before an absolute authority. The Christ Paul preached was an absolute Christ,
and hence the gospel of Christ was an absolute gospel. If the Greek was to accept this
gospel of Christ he had to admit that his own wisdom was foolishness. And to do that
would imply an entire reversal of his previous mode of thought. Naturally such a reversal
of thought could not be effected unless it was effected by God, that is by the Holy Spirit.
But the existence of such a Holy Spirit the Greek would have to deny if true to his own
viewpoint. For him the spirit of generic man is holy. At least he could not allow that the
spirit of any one man should be absolutely holy while the spirit of all other men was
unholy. Thus we see that the Greek mind, because it was operating on the assumption of
the correlativity of God and man, would also have to operate on the assumption of a
relativistic Christ, a relativistic Gospel, and a relativistic Spirit. The Greek mind was
bound to deny the Absolute wherever it might appear. And in this the Greek mind was
only typical of the antitheistic mind in general, as will appear more fully in the sequel.
1. The Abstractness Of Antitheistic Reasoning
In the preceding paragraph we have considered the necessary consequences of the
relativism inherent in the very bedrock of Greek epistemology. We must now add that an
inherently relativistic epistemology is also of necessity and inherently abstract. On the
other hand, we believe that the method of implication or the process of transcendental
reasoning as employed by Christian theism is of necessity and inherently concrete.
But what is meant by the term abstract? In order to make this clear, we must consider
an aspect of the Platonic argument for the immortality of the soul. It will readily be
understood that the reasoning employed by Plato is abstract in the sense of the opposite
of empirical. We can best bring out this point by briefly reviewing the empirical
argument for immortality as developed by Plato. When Socrates is drinking the hemlock
cup, his most faithful disciples are with him in prison to discuss the possibility of life
after death. They seek to reason on the basis of the facts that they can see about them
everywhere. Cebes fears that souls at death may disappear as breath. Yet there is in
nature a law of universal compensation. There must, they think, be a return to life, or the
world of generation would soon have the same form everywhere and therefore cease to be
as it is now in its diversity. But then the more fundamental question comes whether there
is any good reason to hold that this world may not cease to exist altogether, or at least
cease to exist in its present form of diversity. Socrates and his friends feel that their
empirical argument is not necessarily valid unless this changing world has an unchanging
background. That is, the validity of exclusively empirical reasoning is questioned.
But perhaps the soul is not dependent upon the body and therefore will not perish
with the body. It may be that the soul can take possession of several bodies in succession
to one another. Perhaps the soul should not be considered as an effect of the body as a
harmony is the effect of playing the lyre. Perhaps the soul is the cause of the body. It will
soon be stronger than the body and be likely to outlast the body. But even so the
difficulties of an exclusively empirical argument remain. Suppose that the soul should
outwear several bodies what empirical proof is there that the soul will not itself be worn
out at last? As a weaver may wear out many coats but have his last coat outwear him, so
the soul may outwear many bodies but have his last body outwear him. As long as the
argument remains empirical, and empirical only, there is not great comfort for Socrates as
he is about to drink the hemlock cup.
It was at this juncture that the argument as outlined above, i.e., about the soul’s
participation in the Idea of life, was introduced. Socrates and his friends felt that
something had to be done by way of an attempt to seek a more sure foundation than that
afforded by their empirical mode of reasoning. Not that they were ready to discard
empirical reasoning altogether. There must, they felt, be some meaning and significance
to the whole of the temporal universe, and therefore there must also be some meaning to
the process of reasoning as engaged in by men who are products of this world. On the
other hand, they also felt that somehow the soul of man was also a citizen of an eternal
realm. Hence the real validity of man’s reasoning should perhaps be sought in this fact
that man’s mind is an eternal mind. For that reason the attempt was made to show that the
soul of man participated in the very Idea of life.
But now we are to observe carefully that, according to Plato, altogether different laws
obtain in the eternal world of Ideas than in the temporal world of sense. In the sense
world there is nothing upon which one can depend. There is no telling but that things may
turn into their very opposites. There is no underlying unity that controls and gives
meaning to the diversity of the sense world. There is here an ultimate plurality without an
equally ultimate unity. It was for this reason that there was no guarantee to be found in
empirical reasoning for the immortality of the soul. But in the world of Ideas everything
is different. There nothing changes. There we seem to meet with an ultimate unity
without an equally ultimate diversity. The soul which partakes of the nature of the Idea of
life also partakes of the nature of the unchangeability which is characteristic of the Idea
of life, as well as of all other Ideas. Hence things can never change into their opposites.
More than that, things can never change at all. In the world of Ideas qualities are
absolute.
To which of these two worlds, then, does the soul really belong? Surely it can not
belong to both, if the qualities of the Ideal world are summed up in complete
unchangeability and the qualities of the sense world are summed up in complete
changeability. On the other hand it is equally certain that the soul must belong to both
worlds or there would be no unity in its thought.
Plato cannot escape this difficulty and he does not wish to do so. Hence he admits in
the end that it might not be so foolish after all to listen to the ancients who claimed to
have a revelation of the gods on the subject.
It is not as though Plato has not tried to solve the mystery of the revelation of two
worlds that are by definition so absolutely diverse. He tries to solve the difficulty by
saying that “concrete things, which, though not in themselves opposed, contain opposites
... ” That is, the concrete phenomena of this world are altogether changeable in
themselves and might turn into their very opposites so that we cannot depend upon them.
Yet these concrete things somehow carry in them elements of the world of Ideas. To use
a crude illustration, we might suppose a cup of water containing pieces of ice. The water
in itself is soft and changeable but the ice is hard and dependable. But now suppose one
cup of colored water containing a piece of ice that is colored black and another cup of
water containing a piece of ice that is white. If these cups of water should be poured into
a larger cup when still hot they would soon intermix, but the pieces of ice contained in
each cup would not intermix. Now we may compare each cup of water to a concrete
sense phenomenon. The clear water would intermix with the colored, and the colored
would intermix with the clear. In contrast to this, we may compare the pieces of ice to the
elements of Ideas contained in the concrete objects of sense. The pieces of ice would not
intermingle. They would resist intermingling. They would insist on keeping their own
qualities.
So far all would seem to be quite simple. But the difficulty comes when we remember
that the pieces of ice are somehow cut loose from their native realm and are floating in
the very adjustable medium called water. And now there are two questions that press for
an answer at once. In the first place, we must know why it is that these pieces of ice are
floating loose. The question of Cur Deus Homo will not down. If the soul participates in
the Idea of life and may therefore in all fairness be compared to the piece of ice floating
in the water of the temporal world, why did the soul leave its home in glory? This is an
entirely fair question to ask, inasmuch as the sense world was thought of as having no
meaning apart from the world of Ideas. The sense world was said to have no abiding
qualities in it unless it could be shown to be connected with the Ideal world. Hence the
whole mason for the appearance of the sense world at all must be found in the Ideal
world. And that is as much as to say that the soul ought to be able to tell us why it has
become incarnate.
Yet no answer is forthcoming. And the reason for this may be found, we believe, in
the fact that Plato did not really hold that the Ideal world had ever existed in complete
independence of the sense world. It is no doubt true that Plato held that the sense world
never had any meaning apart from the Ideal world, but at bottom he also held that the
Ideal world never had any meaning for itself apart from the sense world. We have already
seen that for Plato time is the moving image of eternity. The one world is for Plato
inconceivable without the other. And if this is the case, it is no marvel that the soul
should be unable to answer the question why it has become incarnate. For in this case the
soul has always been incarnate in a sense.
This point will be more easily understood if we recall that for Plato there is no
possible change of qualities in the Ideal world. This, if taken strictly, would mean that no
change could ever take place anywhere. Theologically expressed, it would mean that
creation would be impossible. The soul did not really become incarnate, but has always
been incarnate in its various incarnations. Thus the sense world must always have existed
in independence of the Ideal world or the two must always have existed in mutual
dependence upon one another.
The same thought comes to expression if we say that for Plato the only way that time
and eternity could come into contact would be by way of an intermixture. Creation or
incarnation would be nothing less than essential differentiation. Plato would at one time
conceive of the Ideas as immovable, so that incarnation would be impossible. Then again,
seeing that incarnation was a fact notwithstanding its theoretical impossibility, he would
hold that the eternal had entered into the temporal, so that there was no longer an
essential difference between time and eternity. We may once more use the analogy of the
ice cubes in the water. At one time Plato would maintain that the ice was the only true
reality. You could kick against it and it would be immovable. Nevertheless he says that
the water was also real to some extent. If the ice cubes were to maintain their reality and
consequent power of resistance, they would require some friction in the medium in which
they were operating. Thus it would be impossible not to ascribe some reality to the water
in which the ice cubes were floating. And then it was found that virtue is actually
teachable, that there is an intermediate stage between the realm of Ideas and the realm of
sense. Ice did after all seem to turn into water and water did seem to become ice. And the
only explanation could be that they were at bottom constituted of the same material. It
was this alone that could explain in any degree the many incarnations of the soul.
Now we have by implication also answered the second question we were going to
ask: namely, how is it that these ice cubes, afloat as they are in a strange medium, are
able to resist one another at all, as Plato says they do? Plato says, “Nothing which brings
the opposite will admit the opposite of that which it brings, in that to which it is brought.”
6
 Why should a little bit of abstract quality cut loose from its eternal moorings in the Ideal
world be able to do anything at all? How would the soul be able to accomplish any
lasting good and therefore be truly virtuous when everything it did might turn into its
very opposite after all the labor had been done? There would be no ground for Ethics or
for Knowledge. Plato tried to do the thing the present-day Pragmatists are trying to do
and he found it impossible. And yet he too thought that somehow it was taking place.
Now all of these arguments have been brought forth in order to show how Plato
exhausted the possibilities of antitheistic thought in the field of epistemology and has
utterly failed to find a solution for the problem of knowledge.
In the first place, Plato tried to find a basis for knowledge in the sense world alone.
That, he realized, was utterly impossible because there was no unity upon which as a
background the diversity of experience might play. On this basis man could not know
anything about anything, because the knowledge of a thing as such would have to include
a knowledge about its place as well as its past. But we have seen that on a purely
empirical ground it was not possible to determine whether or not the soul would be
immortal.
In the second place, Plato tried to find knowledge by seeking it in the Ideal world
alone. But this attempt, too, he recognized to be a failure. There was, to begin with,
trouble in the heavenly realm itself. There seemed to be a fundamental and an underlying
unity there in the Idea of the Good. That Idea seemed to rule as king over all the other
Ideas. But the question was, by what right did the Idea of Good rule over all the others?
Was it because the Idea of the Good was more ultimate? That was out of the question.
The other Ideas were just as ultimate and not at all derived from the Idea of the Good.
That this is so can be noted from the fact that there were Ideas of mud and hair and filth;
that is, there were Ideas of evil things as well as of good things. But since it was of the
very nature of all Ideas to be unchangeable and to oppose their opposites, it would
certainly be intolerable to contemplate the Idea of the Good as bringing forth the Idea of
the Bad. This proves conclusively that there was for Plato a fundamental diversity as well
as a fundamental unity in the world of Ideas. And this would offhand seem to be all to the
good, inasmuch as that is just what we are looking for in a true theory of Knowledge. But
the point is that this very fact that there was a fundamental evil as well as a fundamental
good proves that there was really no underlying and controlling unity in the world of
Ideas after all. The Idea of the Good was king only in name. It would surely be unable to
control its unruly subjects that were just as eternal as itself. Plato’s world of Ideas was a
house divided against itself.
It would be very questionable whether such a realm of Ideas would be of much
service in helping the dwellers upon earth to settle their quarrels. It was unity that was
missing in the temporal sphere, and it was to ask for unity that the inhabitants of earth
had sent to the realms of Jupiter. But Jupiter had his own quarrels to settle and could send
no forces to the earth.
6
 cf. Jowett’s translation of the Phaedo, p. 251.
In the third place, therefore, the plenipotentiaries of both earth and heaven decided
that since they all had to face the same problems it would be wise to pool their interests
and set up an interdenominational federation of churches. In this federation no one was to
sacrifice any of his independence, since the council of the federation was to have only
advisory power.
The third and last position of Plato mentioned in the preceding paragraph needs some
further elucidation, because it represents the high-water mark of Plato’s thought and, we
believe, has exhausted the possibilities of all antitheistic thought, whether ancient or
modern.
This third position of Plato was the result of the recognition that the acceptance of
either the first or the second position would involve the acceptance of an abstract method
of reasoning, which Plato was most anxious to avoid. It was impossible to approach the
whole of truth if one should reason on the basis of empirical facts only. On the other
hand, one could never seek to account for the reality of the world of senses (sensuous
world), if one would limit his knowledge to the standard of the Ideal world only. These
could not be kept separate. And what was most important, Plato had the true insight that
unless one could relate the two worlds in one comprehensive scheme of knowledge, one
could not expect to know anything about either of the two worlds. He felt that in the
human soul the two worlds were somehow united, and one would have to understand this
union to understand either the soul itself or anything else.
From this criticism of Plato on his earlier positions, we can learn what is meant by the
charge of abstract reasoning. It means the reasoning with inadequate categories. Plato
tried to reason with the categories of time when he was reasoning empirically. Then he
found that such reasoning could give him no information about that which he was most
desirous of knowing, that is, whether Socrates should be immortal. Then he tried
reasoning with the categories of eternity. But when he did that, he was unable to account
for the temporal world because the categories of eternity would not move and could not
create. The reason for this failure is not far to seek. Plato assumed that it was possible for
man to reason with the categories of eternity. This is in the nature of the case impossible
for a time-conditioned creature such as man finds himself to be. And if this is so, there
are only two ways that might be followed. One might conclude that there is no
knowledge possible for man at all. The time categories are certainly insufficient to
explain even temporal things, let alone eternal. Hence, if he cannot reason with any but
temporal categories, his knowledge is useless. The only way then for man to have any
knowledge of either temporal or eternal things is for a God to think for us in eternal
categories and reveal to us the Measure of truth we can fathom. Thus we hold that
Christian theism is the only alternative to skepticism. But Plato in the nature of the case
could not see this point. He took for granted that in the soul of man must lie the solution
of the mystery of existence. He would not accept the idea that there should be a God who
alone could think in eternal categories, but he believed that man could also do that which
God could do.
We find the same attitude today in modernism when Dr. Fosdick, e.g., says that he
believes in the divinity of Christ but that he believes in the divinity of his mother too.
That is, according to Fosdick, both Christ and his mother embody a measure of the
principle of love which may be called divine. But in such a presentation the question that
at once arises is whether love is temporal or eternal. And if it is said to be eternal, the
whole question as to who can think eternal categories comes up again. If modernism
wants to be exclusively empirical, as is often the case, it has not yet outgrown Plato’s first
position. If Jesus is regarded as a man only, there is no guarantee that the good he
embodied will in any sense be realized even if all men should try to follow it. And in
such a case, there is not the least reason to expect that all men will follow it. There are
still original Ideas of mud and hair and filth, as Plato spoke of them. In other words, if we
are to think in exclusively temporal categories, the evil in the universe is as fundamental
as the good, and there is no reason to think that the good will penetrate the evil, or if it
does, there is at least no hope that the good will conquer the evil.
The preceding paragraph also proves that no man really can think in exclusively
temporal categories. If he seeks permanency in any respect, in this instance the
permanency of Love, he must try to think in eternal categories. But he is constantly in the
difficulty in which Plato found himself when he tried to make eternal categories operative
in the temporal sphere. Thus the thinking of modernism resembles the act of a physicist
who should try to measure the resistance of two ice cubes in a body of quiet water. There
simply would be no game because of wet ground.
But Plato actually faced the difficulties involved in this antitheistic dilemma and tried
to find a way out in the third position spoken of above.
The “Parmenides” undertakes a criticism of the notion of the Ideal world in general.
Plato asks himself the question how many Ideas or forms can be present in one sensible
object. There had to be in man something of the Idea of the Good and at the same time
there had to be in man something of the Idea of the Bad, because it was in the soul of
man that there was to be unity for the two worlds. But according to the doctrine of the
Ideas, the Ideas of the Good and the Bad would have to be absolutely opposed to one
another and refuse to live together under the same roof. In other words, the problem of
evil remained an insoluble mystery if the doctrines of Ideas were to be accepted.
Moreover, Plato asked whether the whole of different Ideas could be present in one
sensuous object. Even if there were no opposition between two Ideas present in one
object because of their difference in quality, there would be a difficulty because of their
size. The whole of the Idea of the Good would have to be present in each of thousands of
sense-objects. But since this was manifestly impossible, the Idea of the Good would have
to be cut up in many pieces so that something of the Idea might be present in each object.
But if the Idea of the Good were thus cut up, it could no longer furnish the unity that was
indispensable for knowledge. In other words, the doctrine of Idea left the problem of the
one and the many, and therefore that of creation, unsolved. If the Ideal world was itself
an ultimate plurality, it could be of no service in an attempt to explain the plurality of the
world we live in.
Still further, if the Ideas were to be divided there would be no end to this process. An
Idea would be required for every participation of an Idea in a sensuous object. And this
process would have to go on indefinitely. Thus knowledge would be face to face with an
infinite regression.
In desperation, Plato asks himself whether we may then think that the Ideas are no
more than our thoughts, that is, only subjective. But he finds that this offers no escape. If
in such a case the Ideas were to remain in contact with the world of sense and have
meaning for it, we would have to conclude that all things think. We would have to hold
that all our thought about reality is merely subjective, that is, that there is nothing more to
reality than our subjective thought. Thus knowledge would be reduced to an illusion. On
the other hand, if Ideas are no more than thoughts, we might think of them as not having
penetrated the whole of reality, in order thus to save ourselves from subjectivism. But in
that case there would be an area of reality not in contact with thought at all. There would
be an area of reality totally unknown to anyone. And yet this area might have some
influence upon the reality that we seem to have knowledge of. Hence we would not even
have knowledge of that of which we thought we had knowledge. We would once more be
face to face with an infinite regress. Plato says all this by saying that, in this case, there
would be unthought thoughts.
He makes a special point of the fact that if we should think of the Ideas as being
thoughts only, then knowledge would be as impossible for God as it would be for man.
There would be an area of reality that lies beyond God’s thought. And Plato feels that
that is the worst thing that could happen to any theory of knowledge.
The final conclusion drawn from this renewed investigation of the theory of Ideas is
that the fact of knowledge cannot be explained with it. And the reason for this was that
the logic employed throughout was too abstract and exclusive. It was impossible to get a
set of immovable qualities to explain anything in an inherently moving body such as the
temporal universe was. Time and Eternity had been taken at the outset as equally
underived. How then could you expect that time should suddenly be able and willing to
submit to the ways of eternity? On the other hand, how could you expect that Eternity
should suddenly feel at home when taken into the realm of time? Far easier could you
bring under one roof an old bachelor and an old maid, both of them accustomed to a life
of abstraction from one another, and expect that they would get along in harmony, than
get Plato’s two worlds together. “If we postulate a One which is only one (as the
Megarians did), we can say nothing whatsoever about it. Or if (as the Megarians did also)
we identify One with Being we shall have to predicate of it all sorts of incompatible
predicates.” 7
For these reasons then, Plato was driven to what we have called his third position. In
this third position Plato tries to make the categories of Time and Eternity overlap. Instead
of starting with two worlds which had laws of their own which they were loath to modify,
Plato now thinks of these two worlds as having always been together somehow. We
might perhaps compare this to an early marriage such as has sometimes been effected by
parents for their children. If two children were married from the very dawn of their
conscious life we might expect that it would be less difficult for them to live together
than for a couple that had come to middle age before their marriage. A couple married
when young would easily learn to give and take.
Thus Plato tries to make his logic less abstract by thinking of Time and Eternity as
always having been together. Time is thought of as the Moving image of Eternity. Thus
there will be something of eternity in time and something of time in eternity.
Consequently it will not be necessary to make rigidly exclusive demands for the complete
unchangeability of the Ideas or for the ultimate changeability of the sensuous world.
The Sophist tells us that in order to save predication we must establish the possibility
of false predication. The possibility of negative judgment involves the possibility of
positive judgment. To use our analogy once more, it must be possible for husband and
7
 Burnet, Part One, etc., p. 272.
wife to differ on some questions without at once bringing up the matter of divorce. The
differences are to play upon the background of a deeper unity. Up to this time the
husband had threatened with divorce every time he did not get his way altogether, and the
wife had done likewise. From now on they will allow for a certain amount of false
predication within the circle of marriage truth.
In fact Plato wishes to emphasize this point very strongly. From now on predication is
to have no meaning except upon the basis of the assumed indissolubility of the union
between time and eternity. ‘Is’ and ‘is not’ are to have no meaning except in a world in
which they have equal right and the one can never oust the other completely. Is not does
not involve non-existence, but otherness. Our mistake had been that we had thought of
married life as a state of unalloyed conjugal felicity. Now we realize how absurd such an
idea was. Now we even expect some quarrels. We now hold that differences are natural.
There is still a certain amount of independence. Plato speaks of this when he says that not
all forms will intermingle but that some forms will intermingle with some forms. Yet, as
a whole, harmony is to be effected, if it is to be effected at all, by this intermingling of the
forms.
In our criticism of this Platonic logic it is not imperative that we discuss the question
to what extent Plato thought this attempt at a solution of the problem of knowledge
successful. We may say that Plato felt the problem of knowledge to be unsolved even
after this modification of the doctrine of Ideas. He practically says that much when he
makes the statement that not all forms will intermingle with all forms. If all forms
intermingled with all forms, there would once more be a completely colorless mass. In
that case it would be as difficult to make any statement about reality as it would be if all
things were immovable as the world of Ideas was formerly thought of as immovable. In
either case we would be at the place where the Megarians were, who said that all things
were One, and concluded that predication was consequently impossible. And then we
would be face to face with the question whether this One were to be thought of as
temporal or as eternal. If as eternal, then the whole of temporal reality remained
unaccounted for. If as temporal, we could not help but think of an ultimate plurality. Thus
an ultimate plurality would mean the same thing as an ultimate unity. And this amounts
to saying once more that our predication as a whole is without meaning.
On the other hand, it is difficult to see how Plato could say that some forms would
intermingle with some forms, without also saying that all forms would intermingle. Who
would prevent the ice cubes from melting altogether, once you allowed that they melted
to any extent at all? In other words, if you allow that the categories of eternity and time
have always been mutually dependent on one another, there is no stopping till you come
to the station called Pragmatism. Surely the resistance that one ice cube was supposed to
have over against another ice cube would gradually be reduced till it reached the zero
mark.
It is thus that the Platonic argument is seen to be abstract throughout. Plato was glad
to admit that his argument was abstract when he was at his first and second positions. But
we must now observe that his thought had not lost any of its abstract character even when
he maintained his third position. Plato’s logic remained an either or affair. An ultimate
interdependence of the categories of time and eternity leads to just the same abstraction
as that to which an ultimate independence of these categories leads. The reason for this is
that an ultimate interdependence eventually amounts to a victory of the one type of
category over the other. Plato could not stop his ice cubes from becoming water unless he
would freeze all the water into ice. Or, to use the marriage illustration once more, there
was harmony “ever after” because the husband never disputed the wife’s opinions but
took them for granted as final authority.
Plato insisted that the Idea of evil was as original as the Idea of the Good. He also
insisted that the Idea of plurality, was as original as the Idea of unity. And more than that,
he insisted that the Idea of time was as fundamental as the Idea of eternity. This
amounted to saying that the Idea of time is as eternal as the Idea of eternity itself. Or it
amounts to saying that the Idea of eternity is as temporal as the Idea of Temporality. All
of which comes to a complete confusion and stultification of thought. Plato cannot escape
the criticism of the third man. If there must be an Idea of man to explain the Socrates who
walked in Athens, there must be once more an Idea of the participation of Socrates in the
Idea of Socrates, and so on ad infinitum. Plato himself clearly saw this difficulty when he
criticized his first and second positions. He has in no way escaped these difficulties in his
third position. The Neo-platonists demonstrated this fact when they tried to work out this
platonic principle with respect to the Mediator. When they tried to find a Mediator that
was to be an intermixture between the unapproachable Eternal and the Temporal they had
to continue making more Mediators all the time.
All antitheistic thought has to face the third man argument because all antitheistic
thought tries the three ways of Plato in turn, and these three ways are based upon abstract
reasoning.
We must now turn to observe the attempt of Christian theism to meet this pagan
thinking.
Chapter 4: Historical Survey:
C: Mediaeval Epistemology: Its Starting Point
It is not our purpose to begin the review of the history of Christian epistemology by
tracing the material to be found in Scripture. We are interested to know what those who
have studied the Scripture have found there.
Moreover, what we found to be the case with Greek epistemology is also the case
here, namely, that we shall not find a well developed system of epistemology, but only an
epistemology that is implied in the general philosophy of life as held by the fathers of the
church.
We shall not attempt to offer a detailed survey of what all the church fathers had to
offer on the subject. We shall limit our discussion to the creeds of the church and to the
philosophy of St. Augustine. In the creeds of the church we have the authentic opinion of
the church. Certain definite epistemological theories are imbedded in these creeds. In
addition to that, we are fortunate in the fact that the early church possessed an
outstanding orthodox philosopher in the person of Augustine. Origen was a great
philosopher too, but cannot fairly be taken as an example of the early Christian position
because he was not orthodox. On the other hand, there were great men in the church
beside Augustine who were orthodox, but these were theologians rather than
philosophers. In addition to this, there is the fact that it has been customary with
historians of philosophy to put Augustine in the general idealistic tradition from Plato to
Hegel. By challenging this interpretation we shall be face to face with the enemy at once,
and no one can say that we have shirked the most difficult and important part of the task.
It is our purpose to show that Augustine’s thought was the antithesis of Plato’s
thought. Instead of thinking of Augustine as a general idealistic philosopher with certain
inconsistent orthodox elements in his thinking, we hold that Augustine should be thought
of as a Christian theistic philosopher with certain elements of Platonism in his thinking.
We would not say Plato and Augustine, but Plato or Augustine.
In order to accomplish the task just now outlined, we can do no better than contrast
Augustinian thought with Platonic thought on those points which we have discussed
under the epistemology of Plato. We found that Plato tried three ways of reasoning. The
first was exclusively empirical. The second was exclusively metempirical. The third was
an attempt at a union of the first and the second. In none of these ways of reasoning did
Plato overcome the three fundamental assumptions of Greek philosophy. These three
assumptions are (a) that all things are at bottom one; (b) that the many have come out of
the one, that is, the fact of change; and (c) that all things remain at bottom one even after
they have come out of the one.
The result of Platonic thinking was that the assumptions of pre-Socratic thinking were
raised to the level of self-consciously adopted first principles. The conclusion of the
whole of Greek speculation was that all things are at bottom one. Epistemologically
expressed, this amounts to saying that there can be only one type of mind. The human
and the divine mind can never differ in any other way than quantitatively. Both the
human and the divine mind are limited by the circumstance that they find a situation
which is independent of them. The minds of both God and man are placed within a
universe that is larger and more original than, or as original as, themselves.
It is these self-consciously adopted first principles of Platonic thought that are
rejected by Augustine. We are not asking the question whether Augustine was fully
aware of the fact that he had broken with these principles. We are only concerned to
prove that it was a fact that he had. The Platonic elements that remained in Augustine’s
thinking we can very well afford to ignore for the purpose of our argument. Nor are we
concerned just now to note the stages of the development in Augustine’s thought. We are
taking his maturest thought only and contrasting it with the maturest thought of Plato. 1
The question that comes up first of all is the question of Augustine’s method of
reasoning. Did Augustine reason in the way that Plato did in his first position? We
believe he did not. As an illustration of his method of reasoning we may take the classical
example of his attempt to obtain certain knowledge about his own existence. 2 Augustine
did not, in his mature works, reason about the existence of himself as Socrates reasoned
about the immortality of his soul. Augustine did not separate his self-existence from
God’s existence. His argument was not, finally, based upon a consideration of what laws
he observed in the physical universe around him. He did not ask whether there was a law
of compensation observable in the universe that might justify him in his hope that his
soul should survive. The physical universe did not have any existence for Augustine
except as a creation of God. Hence the laws that he observed in the physical universe
could produce no ground for reasoning independently of the plan of God. Thus it was
impossible for Augustine, finally, to reason in exclusively empirical or temporal
categories.
That Augustine did not reason as Plato did in his first position can also be seen from
the fact that he strenuously opposed the sense philosophy of Arnobius and others. In this
opposition to the sense philosophy he seems even to go to the extreme of suggesting that
the physical world is rather a hindrance than a help to true knowledge. We might even
call Augustine a Rationalist if it only be remembered that by that term we would mean to
do no more than to indicate that one opposes the principles of pure empiricism.
It is more important to note that in this opposition to the Sensationalists Augustine did
not go to the extreme of suggesting that the mind creates its own object. In other words
Augustine was not a subjective Idealist. We mention this fact not so much in the interest
of establishing that Augustine was a Realist, as in the interest of establishing that
Augustine was a Theist. If we merely established that he was a Realist, the question of his
theism would still remain open, inasmuch as there have been many Realists who were
also antitheists. What we are interested in noting, therefore, is not so much that according
to Augustine physical objects existed independently of the human mind, as that both the
physical objects and the human mind exist in dependence upon God. “The sensible world
is not thought of by him as itself independent of the intelligible. It not only has its source
in the intelligible world, but derives its whole support and direction from it; and reflects,
after its own fashion, its content.” 3
Has Augustine then perhaps reasoned as Plato did in his second method of reasoning?
This question is of more importance than the first, and is much more difficult to answer,
1
 In the syllabus Christianity in Conflict, Vol. 1, the development of Augustine’s thought
is traced.
2
 cf. The City of God; The Confessions; etc.
3
 B. B. Warfield, Studies in Tertulian and Augustine, p. 142.
it would seem, because it involves the point of Augustine’s relation to Plato as far as their
conceptions of the Ideal world are concerned. Did not both Plato and Augustine separate
the two worlds, the world of sense and the world of Ideas, to God? No more fundamental
question can be asked than this: do the Ideas rest in God? If these Ideas are no more than
an impersonal congregation or rather summation, the world of Ideas cannot hope
permanently to oppose the inroads of Sensationalism. In that case the world of sense
cannot be wholly dependent upon the world of Ideas, and is therefore bound to reassert its
rights.
It must readily be admitted that there is much in Augustine’s writings that would
seem to warrant a Platonic interpretation of his theory of knowledge. He speaks often of
the Ideal world without bringing in the question of the relation of the Ideas to God.
Augustine argues against the Sensationalists as Plato argued, that the human soul has
within it innate ideas derived from the Intelligible World. But, as Dr. Warfield remarked,
when we have observed that much we are on the way to an understanding of Augustine’s
theory of knowledge, but we have not yet reached it. The mere reference to an Ideal
world is in itself not necessarily anything more than deistic. Such a reference is as a
matter of fact deistic unless the world of sensation be conceived of as constantly
depending upon the world of Ideas. And even so it is deistic unless that world of Ideas be
more than a series of impersonal principles. A series of impersonal principles could never
bring forth the world of sensation, so that the world of sensation could really never be
dependent upon it. “Augustine, however, was as little deistic as Sensationalistic in his
thinking, and necessarily advanced a step further to a truly theistic Intuitionalism.” 4
That Augustine was not deistic but theistic, and for that reason differed fundamentally
from Plato, can be seen best of all if we note the Augustinian doctrine of the Trinity. 5 We
shall not attempt to trace in what respect Augustine’s doctrine of the Trinity differed from
that of other church fathers. Suffice it to say that by common consent Augustine
developed the doctrine in the line of orthodox Christianity, and that the doctrine forms an
integral part of his thinking.
We may contrast this doctrine of the Trinity with Plato’s thought by calling attention
to the fact that for Augustine the Trinity furnished the basis of the principles of unity and
diversity in human knowledge. In other words the Trinity is for Augustine as for all
orthodox Christians a conception without which knowledge were impossible to man. That
there is plurality which man must seek to relate to some underlying unity, is patent to all
men. From the earliest dawn of reflective thinking it has been the effort of man to find
unity in multiplicity. But the difficulties that meet one when trying to speculate upon the
question of unity and plurality are that if one begins with an ultimate plurality in the
world, or we may say by regarding plurality as ultimate, there is no way of ever coming
to an equally fundamental unity. On the other hand, if one should begin with the
assumption of an ultimate abstract, impersonal unity, one cannot account for the fact of
plurality. No system of thought can escape this dilemma. No system of thought has
escaped this dilemma. Many systems of thought have denied one of the horns of the
dilemma, but all that they have accomplished by doing this is to find relief in the policy
of the ostrich.
4
 Warfield, op. cit., p. 143.
5
 St. Augustine, on the Trinity, in The Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Ser. 1.3.
What Augustine and all theistic thinkers after him have done is to say that in God,
and more specifically in the triune God, lies the solution of this difficulty. Not as though
man should be able to understand the solution. On the contrary, man can never hope and
should never wish to understand the solution. The reason for this is obvious. If man could
understand the solution it would no longer be a solution. Man’s thought, apart from God,
can in the nature of the case get no farther than an ultimate plurality or to an abstract
unity. Even Robinson Crusoe could not forget that there were other people in the world.
And if he could have forgotten other people, he could not help but see other objects
beside himself. Man could not come to an ultimate unity unless he could come to an
absolute originality, and this he cannot do. But the fact that man cannot understand the
solution does not imply that he cannot reasonably believe in the existence of the solution.
A corollary from the doctrine of the Trinity is that human knowledge is analogical.
Human knowledge must always depend upon divine knowledge. Anything that a human
being knows must first have been known to God. Anything a human being knows he
knows only because he knows God. For that reason too man can never know anything as
well and as exhaustively as God knows it.
The fact that man’s knowledge must always remain analogical is applicable to his
knowledge of God as well as to his knowledge of the universe. God will never be
exhaustively understood in his essence by man. If he were, he would no longer be God.
In that case there would be no solution for the problem of knowledge.
A third corollary from the doctrine of the Trinity is that man’s knowledge though
analogical is nevertheless true. Or to put it more specifically, man’s knowledge is true
because it is analogical. It is analogical because God’s being unites within itself the
ultimate unity and the ultimate plurality spoken of above. And it is true because there is
such a God who unites this ultimate unity and plurality. Hence we may also say that only
analogical knowledge can be true knowledge.
If we turn to a comparison of this Augustinian doctrine of the Trinity with what might
correspond to it in Platonic thought, the great contrast between the two men comes out at
once. There is nothing in Platonic thought that corresponds to the Augustinian doctrine of
the Trinity.
In saying this we do not mean so much that the conception itself is not found, as that
the whole drift of Platonic philosophy is inherently opposed to it, so that we can find
nothing in Plato’s thinking that may even be called an adumbration of the idea of the
Trinity.
To prove this point we should ask again where Plato would find the ultimate union of
the principle of unity and of diversity. It will be said at once that he too sought it in the
Ideal of intelligible world. But this is not really true. For Plato the sense world is not
altogether dependent upon the ideal world. Plato has no doctrine of temporal creation.
Hence the plurality of the sense world is conceived of as ultimate.
It is of supreme importance to note that this fact of the assumed ultimacy of the sense
world makes it impossible for Plato really to seek a solution for the problem of
knowledge in the Ideal world. This assumed ultimacy of the sense world includes the
human mind, because finite mind can never understand the union of an ultimate unity and
diversity. Once you start with the assumption of an ultimate plurality and take as part of
that ultimate plurality the sensible universe, you can never after that come to the
conception of an ultimate unity.
It is for this reason that Plato never attained to unity in the Ideal world. His trouble
was not that he sought an ultimate unity and an ultimate diversity in the Ideal world. His
trouble was not that he sought to interpret temporal reality in eternal categories. His
trouble was rather that he did not really do these things. Plato and Augustine differ on
this most important point—that Augustine did and Plato did not interpret reality in
exclusively eternal categories. Plato did have diversity in his Ideal world, but he did not
have unity there. His Idea of the Good never acquired supremacy over the other Ideas.
We have before noted that this fact comes into bold relief if we recall that Plato struggled
with the Ideas of mud and hair and filth, in short, with the Idea of evil which, to his way
of thinking, was necessarily as original as the Good. Plato could never come to unity in
knowledge, yet he realized that unity was the thing without which knowledge is
impossible.
From this discussion it follows that the Augustinian doctrine of the Trinity could not
be a development of but had to be a reversal of the Platonic theory of knowledge.
Augustine’s doctrine of the Trinity is the very axle upon which his entire theory of
knowledge turns. One who embraces the doctrine of the Trinity holds that human
knowledge is analogical. One who does not embrace the doctrine of the Trinity holds that
human knowledge is original. This is true in the case of Plato in spite of his constant
emphasis that all knowledge depends upon the soul’s relation to the world of Ideas. We
have already noted that according to Plato the plurality of the sense world is ultimate, and
that therefore the human mind is ultimate. Such a mind could not be satisfied with
analogical knowledge. It might recognize a certain superiority in the divine mind, but it
could never recognize an absolute originality in the divine mind.
Platonic thought, logically developed, would have to reject the Augustinian principle
that human knowledge is true because it is analogical. Platonic thought, because it
conceives of the human mind as being original, must reject the notion that the ultimate
essence of any aspect of reality should remain forever a mystery for the mind of man.
Platonic thought must hold to complete comprehension as the never-to-be-forsaken ideal
of human knowledge.
The same point may be further elucidated if we say that Platonic and Augustinian
thought have opposing conceptions of Mystery. Augustinian thought holds that there is
not and has never been mystery for God. It is this that makes the mystery that has always
and that will always surround man not a burden, but a joy, to him. Man can rejoice in the
mystery that surrounds himself because he believes that no mystery surrounds God. If
mystery should be thought of as surrounding God, then nothing would remain for man
but utter despair. A child who knows that his father is a millionaire does not need to have
more than a dollar in his hand. The believer can pray with confidence, “Give us this day
our daily bread.” On the other hand, Platonic thought starts out with the idea that there is
mystery surrounding both God and man. Both have a universe surrounding them in which
they must seek to find unity. This unity is something which neither God nor man has at
the outset of the search. The unity is hidden in the mystery that surrounds them both. This
unity is the mystery that surrounds them both. As the search for unity continues, God and
man can report to one another what progress, if any, each one has made. If unity is ever
to be found it must be found to include the equally original plurality of God and man, of
the world of Ideas and the world of sense. Since such a unity can in the nature of the case
never be found, the mystery that surrounds man must lead to an ultimate despair.
The difference between Plato and Augustine on this most fundamental point of the
position of God in the Ideal world may still more clearly be observed if we notice the
argument each one gives for holding to his own position. Plato says that to appeal to the
revelation of God is really to give up philosophy altogether. He says that we may ask the
oracles of the gods when we have to give up philosophy in despair, but not till then. He
would not appeal to what he considered foreign aid until his own efforts were proved
useless. And even then he did not really expect any help from the ancients or from the
oracles. On the other hand, Augustine is equally convinced that unless human knowledge
has the right to appeal to divine knowledge, not as to a foreign something, there will be
no knowledge for man. He feels that unless we can appeal to God we may as well give up
philosophy. So far from subtracting from certainty of human knowledge, the appeal to
divine revelation makes it all the more certain. “The ultimate ground of our certitude
becomes our confidence in God. In the last analysis, God is our surety for the validity of
our knowledge; and that not merely remotely, as the author of our faculties of knowing,
but also immediately as the author of our every act of knowing, and the truth which is
known.” 6
It must now be noted that just as the doctrine of the Trinity was an essential part of
Augustinian thought and had a determining influence upon his theory of knowledge, so
also his doctrine of man’s creation in the image of God should be taken into
consideration. We have already observed that the creation idea as such places a gulf
between the two types of thought under discussion. In line with this more general
consideration, it should be observed that according to Augustine man was created in
God’s image. This doctrine is a natural consequence of the doctrine of the Trinity. A God
who carries within himself the ultimate harmony of the principles of unity and diversity
could look to no principles beyond himself when creating man. If man was to be created
at all, he was bound to be like God in that there would be within his being an analogue of
that harmony of the principles of unity and diversity which was found in its fulness in the
Trinity. There would be impressed upon man a finite replica of the ideas of God. In this
connection Augustine constantly employs the figure of a ring whose device is impressed
upon wax. Speaking of man’s knowledge of God and of the moral law, Augustine asks
the question whence this knowledge has come. His answer is that this knowledge has
come by virtue of an impress of God. “Where indeed are these rules written, wherein
even the unrighteous recognizes what is righteous, wherein he discerns that he ought to
have what he himself has not? Where, then, are they written, unless in the book of that
Light which is called Truth, whence every righteous law is copied and transferred (not by
migrating to it, but by being as it were impressed upon it) to the heart of the man that
worketh righteousness; as the impression from the ring passes into the wax, yet does not
leave the ring.” 7 “The care which is taken here to represent the process as a transference
of the laws without transfusion of the substance may be said to be the characteristic
feature of this passage, as it is of the entire teaching of Augustine on the topic.” 8
On all this Plato teaches quite the opposite. According to Plato, man is not created in
the image of God because there is no God sufficiently absolute to create man in his own
6
 Warfield, op. cit., p. 149.
7
 On the Trinity 14:25:21.
8
 Warfield, op. cit., p. 148.
image. In the Platonic story of creation God looks up to Ideas that are next to him and is
conditioned by material that is independent of him. Plato’s God does not carry within him
the ultimate principle of unity and diversity, but he is looking for it. Hence man’s
knowledge cannot be an impress of God’s knowledge. If God did try to impress his
knowledge upon man it would naturally be regarded as an imposition by man because he
was more or less God’s equal. Thus Plato and Augustine stand once more opposed to one
another.
Still another aspect of the Augustinian theory of knowledge that brings out the
difference between his theory and that of Plato is that, according to Augustine, man’s
present condition is noetically abnormal. Wax is not always equally receptive to
impressions that are made upon it. So the mind of man is by virtue of its creation in the
image of God ready and fitted to receive true knowledge but has become unfit to receive
true knowledge through man’s deflection from the source of knowledge. By virtue of his
creation man has truth immediately. But since the Triune God is, in the nature of the case,
holy and just, man cannot come into contact with God and receive the truth unless he
seeks God pie, case et diligenter. “O God,” he prays, “whom no one finds who is not
fully purged.” 9 Augustine is deeply convinced that no one can have true intellectual
knowledge of God unless he is morally in tune with God. And he is equally assured that
no one is morally in tune with God unless he has faith. And no one can have faith unless
it be given him by the grace of God. Sin is a separation of man from God that, in the
nature of the case, cannot be healed except by God himself.
Warfield makes it clear that this view of Augustine does not justify anyone saying
that Augustine was a skeptic. 10 Augustine, to be sure, despaired of sinner in his own
astrength ever coming to a possession of true knowledge, but he was equally sure that in
faith there was a removal of the evil consequences of sin. Hence those that have faith are
naturally once more in possession of true knowledge.
For Plato there could be no falling away of man from God since man had never been
exclusively responsible to God either intellectually or morally. Moreover, since the Ideas
of the Ideal world are not unified, it was quite possible according to Plato, to be morally
out of tune with the Idea of the Good, but to have correct intellectual knowledge of the
Ideal world in spite of this moral deflection. This point once more harmonizes with the
notion that it is possible for man to have knowledge even if there is no God who has
absolute knowledge. For the only way in which you could conceive of man not being
obliged to accept God’s interpretation of evil would be if evil existed in independence of
God. And in that case God would not be carrying the ultimate principle of unity within
himself. It is thus that Plato’s theory of evil corroborates our interpretation of Plato’s
theory of knowledge.
Now at last we are in a position to answer the question whether in his mature position
Augustine reasoned as Plato reasoned, in what we have called his second method of
reasoning. After trying in vain in his first empirical argument to establish the immortality
of Socrates, Plato turned to the soul’s participation in the Idea of life. The Idea of life is
unchangeable just because it is an Idea. Hence the soul ought also to be unchangeable
unless, forsooth, it carry within itself something of the Idea of evil too. And just what
9
 quoted by Warfield, op. cit., p. 152; from Sol. 1:3.
10
 cf. his criticism on John Owen’s Evenings With The Skeptics, op. cit., p. 157.
would happen if that were true, Plato finds it hard to imagine. By his own theory, no Idea
can allow the opposite of itself to molest its independence. So then if the soul of Socrates
carries within itself something of the Idea of the Good and something of the Idea of evil,
uncertainty must remain as to the question of immortality. If Socrates were all bad he
would certainly not be immortal. But since Socrates seems to carry elements of both the
good and the bad within him, no one can say what will happen to Socrates. The real
difficulty here, it will be observed, is once more the assumption of an ultimate plurality
without an equally ultimate unity. The opposition of the Ideas to one another is not
conceived of as an ethical antithesis between the Good and the evil. The fact that the
Ideas are equally ultimate excludes the possibility of an ultimate unity inasmuch as none
of the Ideas is totally independent of the world of sense. Notably, the Idea of evil is
dependent upon the evil inherent in the world of sense. Hence if the world of Ideas is
after all dependent upon the world of sense to some extent, it is impossible to establish
the immortality of Socrates upon the basis of the nature of the world of Ideas alone. Thus
the second method of reasoning runs into the first, and partakes of all the uncertainty of
an exclusively empirical argument.
In contrast to this we can readily comprehend that Augustine did not finally reason in
this fashion. In his doctrine of the Trinity lay the guarantee of an equal ultimacy of unity
and diversity. He spoke of one God with one absolute self-conscious existence. This
excluded the possibility of God’s Ideas or plan ever being in any measure dependent
upon a temporal plurality. It also excluded the possibility of the existence of an Idea of
evil apart from his Being. In short, the idea of an ultimate plurality beyond God’s being is
excluded. There had to be a plurality as ultimate as the unity, but this plurality would, in
the nature of the case, be found within the Being of God. Hence Augustine spoke of the
consubstantiality of the three Persons in the Triune God.
From this point of vantage we now realize what the nature of Augustine’s reasoning
would have to be, and we shall find that it corresponds with that which, especially from
his latest works, we know he has employed. Augustine, we know, was almost exclusively
engaged in seeking to know God and himself. How then did he know himself? How
would he argue for immortality? He would argue that he would naturally be immortal
inasmuch as God planned him to be so. He would not believe in the soul’s preexistence,
since that would imply his participation in the essence of eternity itself. In that case he
would be once more a charter member of an original plurality without the Being of God,
which conception he, by definition, had excluded. On the other hand, he would be equally
sure that the evil within him was not due to the indwelling of something of the eternal
Idea of evil. For if evil were eternal it would once more exclude the notion of an ultimate
unity. Hence the warfare within him between good and evil was not a tug-of-war affair in
which two parties were about equally matched. The principle of evil must be finite and
the principle of the good must be infinite. If then he was only identified in purpose with
the power of the infinite good, he would not only be immortal, but also be blessed. And
even if not identified in purpose with the plans of the infinite, he would still be immortal,
but immortal in misery. In either case the unity of God’s plan could not be broken. And
put once more in philosophical terms, this would mean that Augustine is reasoning in
such a way as to make the categories of eternity to be determinative of his thought. His
method is all of one piece instead of a mixture, as was the case with Plato. There was not
the least danger that Augustine would at last end with an abstract logical argument as
Plato had done.
In the Trinity, Augustine found his Concrete Universal. It is the earmark of what
Idealism means by a concrete universal that unity and difference should be equally
fundamental. But since Plato never succeeded in making unity and difference equally
basic, it is fair to say that Plato’s thought remained abstract. He reasoned first on the basis
of a physical world which he tried to abstract from the Ideal world. Then he reasoned on
the basis of an Ideal world which he tried to abstract from the world of sense. But when
he reasoned upon the basis of the sense world, he nevertheless took for granted the
existence of the Ideal world with its claims, and when he reasoned in his second method
upon the basis of the laws of the Ideal world, he nevertheless took for granted the
existence of the world of sense with its claims. He did not have the courage to be either
exclusively empirical or exclusively ideational. Hence his reasoning was in each case
nothing but a temporary extraction of one aspect from the other aspect. He lacked the
courage to abstract God from the sense world to such an extent that he really becomes
self-supporting and therewith Concrete.
With respect to this third position of Plato, we have noted that the abstraction of the
two worlds was a deistic abstraction. In other words, we may compare the abstraction of
the two worlds to the cutting of an apple and the placing of one half upon a high shelf and
placing the other upon a table. In his first position Plato tried to reason about the nature of
the apple by referring to the half upon the table. In the second method Plato tried to
determine the nature of the apple by reasoning about the half that was upon the shell In
each instance, however, he was well aware of the fact that there was another half. Now in
the third position, Plato is going to reason by placing the two halves of the apple together
again. If this analogy reflects Plato’s thought at all, it teaches us that Plato’s third position
did not differ greatly from his first and second positions. In none of the three positions
did Plato deny or escape the three fundamental assumptions of Greek thought spoken of
above. In all of Plato’s methods he took for granted that all things are at bottom one.
Even when he seemed to be abstracting the Ideal world from the sense world so far that
they seemed to have nothing to do with one another, Plato was not denying the
assumption of an underlying unity of all reality. In his most deistic flights, Plato was
pantheistic still. Deism and Pantheism are at bottom one. Plato’s two worlds were always
thought of as mutually dependent because equally original. Hence the deism of Plato
could do nothing but turn into the Pantheism of Plato. It is this that was meant by saying
that the three assumptions of pre-Socratic thinking were raised to self-consciously
adopted first principles by Plato.
Now the whole doctrine of the Trinity is a fiat denial of these principles of Greek
thinking. There was in Augustine’s maturest thought neither deism nor pantheism. The
world of sense was not thought of as in any sense as original as God. Hence there could
be no deistic abstraction of one world from the other because all the principles of
interpretation lay in God. There was no need for the categories of eternity to make
overtures to the categories of time. The solution of the deepest philosophical difficulties
was not to be sought by an intermingling of categories, because that would only increase
these difficulties. The solution of the deepest problems was rather to be sought in a
reasonable faith that they are solved in God and by God, and therefore are solved for us.
It is not our purpose here to discuss the difficulties that may be said to be involved in
this Augustinian theory of knowledge. It was our purpose to make clear the great
antithesis that underlay the two types of thought from the very beginning. There are many
elements in Augustine’s thought that are foreign to his inmost convictions. But these
elements do not justify us in giving a Platonic interpretation to Augustine’s thought.
What the history of epistemology has taught us thus far is that there is one great
struggle going on between two main and mutually exclusive types of thought. The
warfare between these two types of thought is not merely an intellectual game but is a
moral and religious struggle engaging all the powers of heaven and hell. If Augustinian
thought should eventually prove true, there is a living and absolute God who cannot but
punish wrong philosophy because it is an expression of an antitheistic spirit. It is Plato or
Augustine; it is not Plato and Augustine.
Chapter 5:
Historical Survey:
D. Mediaeval Epistemology: Its Climax
In placing as much emphasis upon the difference between the genius of Platonic and
the genius of Augustinian thought, we have sought to bring into bold relief the schism
that separates the two main theories of epistemology. We should now expect perhaps that
after Augustine these two opposing systems would turn toward combat at once. But we
have already observed that even in Augustine’s thought things were not as clear cut as
that. It was necessary to show the genuinely theistic framework of his system by cutting
away much of the proud flesh of paganism that remained in his thinking. We should
therefore rather expect that for some time to come there will still be much intermixture of
the antitheistic and the theistic motifs.
It is exactly this that we find to be the case. Church theologians eagerly grasped and
tenaciously held on to the remnants of paganism in Augustine’s thought, and raised these
to great prominence in the system of the Church.
For our immediate purpose we need only turn to Scholasticism and the Mysticism of
the Middle Ages to point out this fact. With Scholasticism we come to a well worked out
and a detailed epistemology that has characteristics of its own. Moreover, Scholasticism
is of particular importance to us because its epistemology is still the official epistemology
of the Roman Church.
The claim made by the Roman church is that its system of belief and practice are
more completely antithetical to the belief and practice of paganism than the system of
Protestantism could be. It will therefore be of particular value for us to study the
epistemology of Scholasticism with this claim in mind. Since Modernism is regarded by
both orthodox Romanism and orthodox Protestantism to be a revival of paganism, it is of
importance to note which of the two, Romanism or Protestantism, may be expected to put
up the best opposition to this revival of paganism.
There were two tendencies in scholastic thought that fought with one another for the
mastery of the field. There was the Augustinian tendency which prevailed to a large
extent in the 11th and 12th centuries. Anselm was largely Augustinian in his thinking. 1
Then there was the Aristotelian tendency at first resented by Abelard. It was this second
tendency that gradually gained the upper hand. In the 13th century when Scholasticism
was at its height, Aristotelianism was largely in control of the field.
By saying that Aristotelianism was in control of the field, we do not mean that it had
replaced Augustinianism altogether. We refer chiefly to the method of investigation
employed. Thomas Aquinas, the great master of Scholasticism, tried to defend the truth
of the Church doctrines by employing the Aristotelian methods of reasoning. Moreover,
Scholasticism, when at its height, did not limit its activity to the defense of church
doctrine insofar as these doctrines pertained to salvation, but it also attempted to obtain a
comprehensive philosophy of life as a whole.
1
 cf. his Cur Deus Homo, Monologium, Proslogium.
The fact that men turned to Aristotle for a method of theology is already indicative of
the fact that they had not yet sensed the depth of the antithesis between the theistic and
the antitheistic motif. If the Christian doctrine of the Trinity had really sunk into the
consciousness of the teachers of the church it would have been impossible for them to
have turned again to the fleshpots of Egypt. But we have already seen that even
Augustine did not understand the full bearing of the doctrine of the Trinity for the
interpretation of life as a whole. Even Augustine had not dared to say what the Israelites
said, i.e., that they would build without the help of the Samaritans. It is not to be
marveled at then, that when all the writings of Aristotle became known to the teachers of
the church in the 13th century, they were tempted to make much use of them.
It should be carefully noted that our criticism of this procedure does not imply that we
hold it to be wrong for the Christian church to make formal use of the categories of
thought discovered by Aristotle or any other thinker. On the contrary, we believe that in
the Providence of God, Aristotle was raised up of God so that he might serve the church
of God by laying at its feet the measures of his brilliant intellect. When Solomon built the
temple of God he was instructed to make use of the peculiar skill and the peculiar gifts of
the pagan nation that was his neighbor. But this was something quite different than to
build together with pagan nations. The Samaritans wanted to help the Jews construct the
city and the temple. Hence they were rejected by the true Jews. The Phoenicians merely
wanted to bring their treasures to Solomon and let him construct the way he saw fit.
Hence they were gladly received by Solomon.
What the Scholastics did was not in imitation of Solomon, but was the acceptance of
aid from the Samaritans.
That this criticism of Scholasticism is true can best be seen if we ask ourselves the
most pivotal question that can be asked in epistemology: namely, what the idea of the
Scholastic was about the human self as far as its dependence upon God as the source of
interpretation is concerned. We asked this question about the Greeks and found that the
Greeks did not think it necessary to think of the human self as, at the outset, in contact
with an absolute God. When we ask what the Scholastics thought about this subject it
appears that they were at least vague and uncertain upon this most pivotal point. And this
is a right serious matter. No theory that wishes to be called Christian theistic can afford to
be uncertain on this point.
To prove that the Scholastics were uncertain on this point, we must call attention first
of all to the Scholastic doctrine of the soul. R. Seeberg says of this that the Scholastics
accepted bodily the Greek doctrine of the soul. 2 What Seeberg means by saying that the
Scholastics have taken over the entire conception of the soul from the Greeks is that,
according to both Greeks and Scholastics, the highest aim of man is knowledge. That is,
there is an intellectualism that is characteristic of both. The vital functions of the soul are
first the lowest or vegetative function, second the appetitive, and last the cognitive. The
latter two, including the whole psychic life proper, are divided into two orders, the
sensible and the supra-sensible; we have knowledge of and desire for sensible things. 3
The really dangerous thing about this intellectualism of the Scholastics is that it all too
2
 cf. Real-Encyklopedie, Vol. 27, p. 714—“Zunachst wird die ganze griechische
Seelenstellung acceptiert.”
3
 cf. DeWulf, Scholastic Philosophy, p. 128.
easily brings with it the gradation idea of reality from which it was born. The reason the
Greeks gave for placing the essence of man in the intellect rather than in the will was that
the will was always desirous of having sensuous things. And if it be asked why it should
be wrong for the will to seek after the things of sense, the answer is that these are
inherently evil. On the other hand, the intellect of man seemed to make him an inhabitant
of the world of ideas, and basically participant in the Idea of the Good.
It is but fair to ask then, whether we find these elements in Scholastic thinking too. If
we do, then the intellectualism of the Scholastics is not merely an emphasis upon the
priority of the intellect, an emphasis with which most orthodox Protestants would heartily
agree, but rather an indication of the pagan position that knowledge is possible for man
apart from the interpretation of God.
A point of great importance in this connection is that the Scholastics did not sense the
full epistemological significance of the Christian concept of creation. If they had, they
could not have thought of the sense world as to some extent inherently evil. And
consequently, they could not have thought of the intellect alone as the really
distinguishing characteristic of man. We notice that the Scholastics have clung to the
Greek idea rather than to the Christian idea in this respect. They re-introduced, or failed
to eliminate, the pagan concept of the two worlds as opposed to one another by the very
nature of things. Just as in the time of the judges the Israelites failed to drive out the
remnants of the nations that dwelled in their midst, so the Scholastics failed to drive the
remnants of paganism out of Christian thought. In both cases the punishment was
absorption by paganism to a large extent.
Still further, the Scholastics not only retained or reintroduced the idea of two
inherently opposed worlds, but they also retained or reintroduced the obscurity that
obtained among the Greeks on the question of God’s place in the Ideal world. That the
Scholastics had no clear Christian convictions on this matter is apparent from the very
fact that they discussed so hotly the question of the universals. One who was truly
Augustinian in his thought could not have been so much interested in these questions
except for the purpose of ejecting the paganism involved in the asking of them. For one
who is truly Augustinian the problem does not exist as far as the mind of God is
concerned. By this we mean that when the problem is traced to its lair, it is found to be
once more the old problem of the one and the many. In other words, the most significant
thing about the doctrine of the universals is that it brings up the question as to the relative
ultimacy of unity and plurality for human thought. On this question the believer in the
Augustinian position holds that unity and plurality are equally ultimate because both are
found in the person of the triune God. Hence, if anyone asks the question about
universals in its deepest depth, he is asking the question about the tenability of Christian
theism as a whole. He is not asking a question within the Christian theistic camp about
which Christians can well afford to differ, but he is asking about the very foundations of
Christianity itself.
The same truth may appear still further if we say that the question of the universal and
the particular appeared to the Scholastics as a problem to which the human mind should
address itself and which it might reasonably expect at some time to be able to solve. If it
is true that the solution of the problem of the one and the many lies in the Trinity, it will
in the nature of the case never be comprehensible to man. For man to attack this problem
at all is an indication that he has to that extent wiped out the distinction between God and
himself. We have sought to bring out this idea when discussing the philosophy of
Augustine. There we saw that there are two mutually opposing views of Mystery. The
Christian theist holds that there is mystery for him, but that there is no mystery for God.
The Christian theist will not try to solve what in the nature of the case must be mysteries
for him. If he does, it is an indication that he is no longer satisfied to leave the solution of
the problems of the universe to God. If he does, it is an indication that he wants to set up
his own mind as the standard of truth. If man undertakes to harmonize the fundamental
“antinomies” of thought for himself he has therewith asserted that he does not require
God’s service for that purpose. All the “antinomies” of human thought, such as the
relation of time and eternity, the one and the many, unity and diversity, are involved in
the problem of the universals. There are only two possible attitudes that can be taken to
these “antinomies.” One can say that it is the business of the human mind to solve these
“antinomies,” and that unless it succeeds in doing so there is no valid knowledge for man.
Or one can say that since man is finite, it is clearly not the business of man to seek to
solve these “antinomies,” and that they must be solved in God or man’s thought would be
meaningless altogether. We may even go farther and say that antitheistic thought has
artificially created these antinomies. If a man would say to himself that unless he can
successfully climb city hall he does not see how he can walk the street, we try to point
him to the fact that the two accomplishments are not mutually dependent. Thus also it is
not necessary for man to be able to solve these antinomies of thought before he can have
adequate knowledge for his life.
The Scholastics made the same mistake as the Greeks. Both took for granted that
words must be used either simply univocally or simply equivocally. Both took for granted
that every predicate used must apply to God in the same way that it applies to man or
there can be no meaning in any predication at all. It is possible to produce quotations
from Aquinas and the other Scholastics which seem to assert the contrary of this. Aquinas
speaks of the necessity of analogical reasoning. But the point is that he is not consistent
in this. He constantly reverted to the Greek position that it is reasonable and possible for
man to engage in the attempt to solve these antinomies. Moreover, what Aquinas means
by analogical reasoning is based upon the Aristotelian notion of analogy of being. This
notion implies that the abstract rationality of Parmenides and the abstract diversity of
Heraclitus are involved in one another. The Thomistic notion of analogical knowledge is
therefore the direct opposite of the idea of analogical knowledge inherent in Augustine’s
latest thinking. Augustine’s notion of analogy presupposes the biblical teachings of the
Trinity, of creation, and of redemption, while the Thomistic notion of analogy is built on
Aristotelian philosophy and, therefore, excludes these biblical presuppositions.
Still further, we may observe that when the question of the universals is taken in its
more proximate sense of referring to the question whether the universal exists prior to the
thing of sense, or after the thing of sense, there is a further distinction that must be
introduced. Even in this case it is necessary to ask whether we mean that the universal
exists prior to the thing for the mind of man, or for the mind of God. It goes without
saying that an Augustinian will have to reply that the universal exists prior to the thing as
far as the mind of God is concerned. That is but another way of saying that God has
created all things according to his eternal counsel. We may ask how it was possible that
Christian theists could seriously debate such a question among themselves unless they
had a large dose of paganism in their modes of thought. The Scholastics seemed to think
it quite an innocent belief for a Christian to entertain that matter had existed eternally. It
even seemed to help when the question of evil was to be discussed.
If we divide the doctrine of universals into three aspects, as we have done, (a) the
problem of the one and the many in its most fundamental import, (b) the problem of the
existence of any physical fact prior to the plan or apart from the plan of God, and (c) the
doctrine of the priority or posteriority of the human mind in its relation to the facts of the
universe, it appears that the fight could not well have been about the third aspect
exclusively, because that problem was not important enough to raise such a hot dispute,
while if it was about the first and the second aspect of the problem, the very discussion of
it is already indicative of a lapse from the theistic position.
All this goes to show once more that when we say with Seeberg that the Scholastics
took over the Greek position on the doctrine of the soul, it really means that the
Scholastics took over much more than some details of psychology. They really took over
a large territory of the Greek epistemology as well. In fact they took over the basic
methodology of Aristotle. The soul sought once more to effect a harmony between two
worlds that were conceived of as existing in independence of one another originally. That
is, an ultimate plurality was assumed to exist beyond God. It is for this reason that the
Scholastics, when they turned away from empirical methods of argument, as most of
them did, fell into the error of reasoning in an abstract fashion upon the characteristics of
the Ideal world. In other words, their method often resembled what we have called the
second method of Platonic reasoning. And since they failed to find the ultimate unity and
diversity in the Trinity, they could not harmonize the inherent difficulties of the Ideal
world, and turned finally with Plato to his third method of reasoning, namely, of mixing
the categories of time and eternity after all. It is this which we see in the large amount of
pantheism that Scholasticism has retained in its general gradation theories.
We have now before us the most fundamental difficulty inherent in all Roman
Catholic apologetics. Rome’s epistemology is itself so largely pagan that it can never
expect to offer a real antithesis to modernism. The human mind is thought of as being
able to study facts without necessarily thinking of these facts as derived from God. It is
true that more recent Roman writers have tried to develop the Scholastic doctrine so as to
make it seem less fair to bring in the charges that we have brought. Thus Fulton J. Sheen
says with respect to the question of antinomies which we have discussed, “This
analogical predication in virtue of which the created mode of these absolute perfections is
predicated of Him is the solution of the so-called antinomies.” 4 Yet at the same time the
same writer asserts his indifference to the question of the eternity of the existence of
matter. He says: “If the world is eternal, it is eternally insufficient in terms of existence.
If the world has always existed, then God has always caused its existence.” 5 But there
can be no true analogical reasoning as long as the material universe or anything else that
is finite be thought of as existing except as created by God. There is exactly as much
reason for holding to the doctrine of creation as there is for holding to the doctrine of
providence. If Sheen thinks it necessary to hold that nothing could have existed at any
time unless it were upheld by God, it is difficult to see why he should not maintain with
equal force that God must have created all things for them to exist at all. Sheen is willing
4
 cf. F. J. Sheen, God And Intelligence.
5
 Op. cit., p. 226.
to grant the necessity of creation in the case of human minds. He only holds that creation
out of nothing need not refer to matter. But in either case, the denial of creation would
involve the existence of a fact next to God in some manner of correlativity with him. In
that case it could no longer be said that God is self-sufficient or that the whole principle
of interpretation lies within the Trinity.
We only mention this in passing to call attention to the fact that though as orthodox
Protestants we can most heartily agree with Sheen and others when they criticize the anti-
intellectualism of our day, we should be on our guard against taking responsibility for all
further specifically Roman Catholic consequences that these writers draw from their
conception of the place of the intellect. The Roman Catholic conception of the intellect is
today, as it was in the Scholastic period, to a large extent pagan in its origin.
In the preceding section we have tried to bring the Scholastic position into contrast
with the full-fledged Christian theistic position. We must now also seek to bring it into
contrast with the full-fledged Christian theistic position. This is merely a matter of
emphasis, but not, for that reason, unnecessary.
It was but natural that the Scholastics should be insufficiently Christian their
epistemology, since they were insufficiently theistic.
In order to comprehend this point we must return once more to the Scholastic doctrine
of the soul. It is common knowledge that according to Scholastic teaching the image of
God in man is not thought of as forming the very warp and woof of man, but as
something that he received in addition to his natural being. The image of God is thought
of as a donum superadditum. But it is not so commonly realized that the origin of this
doctrine lies in the pagan idea of a material universe with an inherent evil in it existing
independent of God. With such a world it would be impossible for God to create man
perfect as a natural product. Accordingly, God would have to add something to the
natural product in order to have some sort of perfection.
From this conception of the image of God in man it follows that the fall of man was
not a very serious thing. Man lost the additional something, but really continued to be
quite natural and normal after the fall. He was morally the worse for the fall, but
intellectually it did not seem to make much difference. Consequently we find that
according to Scholastic theory, the intellect of man, even after the entrance of sin into the
world, can, by virtue of its integrity, abstract from the universe some notions about God
that are true.
And here we must halt to note the complete anti-Augustinianism involved in this
position. If it is true that one can not be a full-fledged theist unless one holds that no fact
can be interpreted without reference to God, it is still more plainly true that one cannot be
completely Christian in his thinking unless he holds that no fact can be understood by a
sinner apart from Christ. Without Christ there is no true wisdom about anything, and least
of all about God. It should be carefully noted here that we are speaking now of the
“natural man.” That “natural man,” according to the New Testament, is at enmity against
God and cannot know God. When we speak of the regenerated man the matter stands
quite different. The intellect of the regenerated man can know God and can also show
that the only intellectually intelligible position for man to take is that which is presented
in Scripture. The Scholastics did not thus distinguish between the intellect of the
regenerated and the intellect of the non-regenerated man. Scholasticism just speaks of the
intellect in general. We have seen that the mistake made by the Greeks when they studied
anything at all was that they took for granted that they could just speak of mind in
general, without asking whether there was any difference between the human and the
divine mind. Similarly, the Scholastics have uncritically assumed that it makes no
difference whether one speaks of the “natural” or the “regenerated” man.
It is true that Scholasticism freely admitted and maintained that man cannot have
knowledge of higher things except by way of the grace of God, but this does not in the
least abate the thrust of our criticism. The point in dispute is not whether there is some
knowledge that must be acquired by revelation, but whether there is any knowledge that
can be acquired without redemptive revelation. We hold it to be definitely anti-Christian
to say that any man can have any true knowledge of anything except through the wisdom
of Christ.
Our conclusion with respect to Scholastic epistemology as a whole must be that it has
not helped forward but has retarded the Augustinian principle. This does not at all mean
that Scholasticism has made no advance in details. Nor does it in the least minimize the
greatness of the intellectual labor displayed in the movement as a whole. It only means
that we cannot turn back to Scholasticism as Rome today is doing, in order to find a
solution for the epistemological difficulties of the day. What was most needed since the
time of Augustine was a clearer elaboration of the conception of God as the absolutely
self-conscious being in whom unity and diversity are equally fundamental, and a
corresponding elaboration of the notion of the human mind as a receptively
reconstructive agent thinking God’s thoughts after him. Instead of finding this in
Scholasticism, we found a reversal to the pagan motif in epistemology. We found (a) the
conception of an absolutely self-conscious God toned down once more. This was done
(1) by thinking of the world of sense as in some way as original as the world of Ideas, and
(2) by thinking of the world of Ideas after the fashion of the Greeks at least to some
extent, by not clearly subjecting all the Ideas to the concept of the triune God. We found
(b) that in accordance with this view of God and the world, the human mind is once more
given much of the independence that it was given by the Greeks. The Scholastics as well
as the Greeks argue for the immortality of the soul from the mere fact of its
immateriality.
The Israel of God was tired of building alone, and was gradually accepting more aid
from the Samaritans that lived on every side. The antithesis between the church and the
world was dying out. Before daybreak, how dark the night.
Chapter 6:
Historical Survey:
E. Modern Epistemology: Lutheranism
Protestant epistemology as a whole may be said to have certain characteristics that
distinguish it from Roman Catholic epistemology. These characteristics can all be
gathered about the two heads that we have mentioned from time to time, namely, the
complete self-consciousness of God and the consequent analogical reasoning on the part
of man.
That Protestantism has taken the self-consciousness of God more seriously than
Scholasticism has, can be learned from the fact that Protestantism made the Bible central
in its thinking. The Protestant doctrine of the Bible is that it is to be the absolute standard
of faith and practice for men. All thought is true if it corresponds to the principles
contained in the Word of God. The Christian consciousness is not something that stands
next to the Bible with a sort of equal authority, but is something that must constantly be
tested by the Bible as its absolute standard. In the Bible, Christ speaks with absolute
authority to man.
This Protestant doctrine of the Bible does away with the dualism of Scholastic
epistemology. It is no longer possible for man to have true knowledge about anything
apart from the Bible. And especially is it impossible to have any true knowledge about
God apart from the Bible.
In harmony with this doctrine of the Bible, is the Protestant conception of sin. Sin
has, according to Protestantism, vitiated the whole of the human personality, his intellect
as well as his will. It is for this reason that man must rely on the Scriptures altogether for
the true interpretation of all reality. Thus, the fact of redemption is made to count for
much more in the case of Protestants than in the case of the Scholastics. All thought must
be made captive to the obedience of Christ.
But if it is true that Protestant epistemology is more genuinely Christian than
Scholastic epistemology, it follows that Protestant epistemology is also more truly
theistic than Scholastic epistemology was. Hence to say that the Bible is the absolute
authority for man is also to say that God is the absolute authority for man. It means that
the solution for the problem of knowledge is once more left to, the person of the triune
God. It is this that faith implies. Protestant faith claims to be “reasonable” because only
on the presupposition of God’s speaking to man in Scripture can human “reason”
function properly. To make every thought captive to the obedience of Christ speaking in
Scripture is to reason analogically in the proper sense of the term.
Protestantism has taken the doctrine of creation seriously. Consequently, the dualism
of the sense world and the Ideal world is done away with completely. The sense world is
not given that shadowy reality from all eternity that it was given by the Scholastics.
Hence the sense world will have to be interpreted in terms of the God who created it. For
this reason the danger of purely empirical reasoning is done away with once for all. And
more than that, for the same reason, the danger of abstract reasoning one the basis of the
qualities of the Ideal world is also done away with. The Greeks and the Scholastics after
them had given a fictitious reality to the world of sense. After giving an original reality to
the world of sense, it was once for all impossible to obtain the conception of a God in
whom the principle of unity and diversity would be equally ultimate. But now that the
doctrine of creation out of nothing was restored to theological thought it was also
possible to have the conception of the Trinity. Accordingly, when the doctrine of
Creation made the method of empirical reasoning unnecessary, it also made the second
Platonic method of reasoning from the abstract principles unnecessary. In fact, it made
this method impossible.
Finally, the restoration of the doctrine of creation made the third method of reasoning
of Plato impossible because it forbade the intermixture of the categories of time and
eternity.
If now these suggestions correspond with the truth of the matter, it is in Protestantism,
if anywhere, that we will have to look for a complete antithesis to the antitheistic
epistemology inherited from the Greeks. Accordingly, we must now turn to the main
divisions of Protestant theology to see what they have to offer us on the subject. We
naturally turn to Lutheranism first. Yet since the question that is constantly before our
minds is which of the Protestant movements has been most faithful to the principles of
Protestantism, and which one will offer us the most in the way of a consistently Christian
theistic epistemology, it will be useful to discuss Lutheranism by contrasting it with
Calvinism.
We must therefore ask what the genius of Lutheranism is and compare this genius of
Lutheranism with the genius of Calvinism, always keeping in mind that it is the
difference in epistemology that we are looking for.
In seeking the differences in epistemology, it is but natural that we look for them
mostly in the various discussions in the field of soteriology. It was in this field that the
early Reformers made their most important contributions to theology. We shall constantly
have to ask ourselves what the epistemology is that is involved in the answers that are
given to the question of the salvation of the human soul. This is the case especially with
Luther. He, more so than Calvin, limited his investigations to definitely soteriological
doctrines.
How and for what reason does the individual Christian feel himself to be in genuine
contact with the Christ, and therefore with God? Whence does the individual Christian
have the assurance that he is in possession of the Truth? The Ritschlian doctrine of a
subjective satisfaction on these points without an objective foundation has never entered
the minds of the Reformers. If they think they have eternal life, it is based upon the
presupposition that an absolute God exists and has revealed himself in Christ and in the
Scriptures.
Lutheranism did not as fully as Calvinism rid itself of the remnants of Scholasticism.
Herzog calls attention to this when he says that Luther’s attack was not directed squarely
against the paganism that was found in the church of Rome, but against the legalism that
was its fruit.
The truth of this may be seen from the Lutheran conception of the image of God in
man. In opposition to Rome, all the Reformers held that the image of God was no mere
donum superadditum, but was inherent in the nature of man and therefore of pivotal
significance for knowledge. But Luther, in distinction from Calvin, thought of the image
of God in man as existing exclusively in the moral attributes of knowledge, righteousness
and holiness. He ignored the conception of the image of God in the wider sense, i.e., as
consisting of man’s intellect and will. It should be carefully noted that this conception of
the image of God in man as entertained by Luther is a remnant of Scholasticism. We saw
that the reason for the Scholastic doctrine of the image of God as a donum superadditum,
was that the Scholastics had not fully cast out the pagan leaven of an originally existing
sense world. Man was in part formed out of this pre-existing material which was
refractory. Accordingly, not the whole of man’s relationship as a self-conscious being
was with the personality of God. In other words, man’s relationship to the world about
him was not completely mediated through the personality of God. There was a remnant
of impersonalism about it all. Similarly, we find that there is a remnant of impersonalism
in Lutheran thinking. Luther thinks it possible that God’s dealings with man can at some
points be below the level of personal dealings. This appears clearly from the fact that
according to Luther, the fall of man resulted in his being impotent, in the sense that he
was to be treated by God as a stone or a block. In his argument with Erasmus on the
bondage of the will, Luther not only argues for man’s ethical inability as such, but
virtually implies that man’s relationship to God after the entrance of sin into his heart has
made it necessary for God to deal with man mechanically. Luther’s early teaching on
predestination verges on the borderline of philosophical determinism. Then too, this same
impersonalism appears from the fact that according to Luther, the means of grace, i.e., the
Word and the sacraments, work, to some extent, mechanically. This impersonalism that is
found in Luther’s position call be traced, we believe, to a remainder of the Scholastic
notion that there are some vague impersonal principles that have an influence on man’s
being. A completely Christian theistic epistemology can allow for no impersonalism
anywhere along the line of the transactions between God and man.
The same element of impersonalism comes to the fore still more clearly in the fact
that historically the semi-determinism of Luther developed into the synergism of
Melanchthon. This is a very controversial point. The point is not controversial in the
sense that it may be doubted whether synergism actually was taught by Melanchthon.
This point is conceded by all. The point of controversy is whether or not this synergism
of Melanchthon is to be understood as an advance toward a greater emphasis on a
personal relationship between God and man. Speaking of this, Benson says that
Melanchthon made a great advance toward personalism because he clearly distinguished
between God’s work in relation to the physical creation and God’s work in relation to his
rational creatures. 1 This judgment of Benson has a plausibility, but no more than a
plausibility. There was, to be sure, in the synergism of Melanchthon an emphasis upon
the fact that man’s intellect and will must be taken into consideration when the relation of
God to man is discussed. Luther had almost forgotten this. Yet, when taken in its ultimate
effect, synergism does not work in the direction of a greater personalization of the
relation between God and man. Synergism takes for granted that there can be no truly
personal relation between God and man unless the absoluteness of God be deified in
proportion that the freedom of man is maintained. Synergism assumed that an act of man
cannot be truly personal unless such an act be unipersonal. By that we mean that
1
 Benson, Fragenach, usw. p. 43: “Der grosse Fortschritt besteht vor allen darin dass
Zwisschen dem Verhaltniss des Menschen zur Wirksamkeit Gottes im physischen und dem
Verhaltniss des Menschen zur Wirkamkeit Gottes auf den Gebiet des Sittlichen klar und
deutlich unterscheiden wird.”
according to synergism, a personal act of man cannot at the same time, but in a different
sense, be a personal act of God. Synergism assumes that either man or God acts
personally at a certain time, and at a certain place, but that they cannot act personally
simultaneously at the same point of contact. In other words, synergism holds that
personal activity on the part of man must always be at the expense of the personal
character of that which surrounds him. This might seem to be an innocent matter as far as
the universe around us is concerned. Yet the danger is very great, since the
depersonalization involved does not limit itself to the material universe. It extends itself
logically to God. And even if it does not at once and clearly oppose the personal activity
of God, it remains a fact that there is always a tendency in synergism to hold on to some
of the remnants of the Greek idea of a universe, in some sense of the term, independent of
God. If nowhere else, the synergist at least extracts his own activity from the personal
activity of God at some point of time. And just to that extent he has depersonalized God.
It was but natural that the semi-determinism involved in Luther’s conception of
predestination should turn to something that looked like a greater emphasis on
personalism. The human faculties were bound to reassert themselves. But it must be said
with equal emphasis that it was but natural that once the reaction came, it was bound to
go in the direction of that which merely seemed to be a greater personalism. The
“mechanism” of Luther was not really a reaction, but rather a development. There was an
element of impersonalism in Luther’s position, and that element of impersonalism merely
changed its form, in the synergism of Melanchthon.
The significance of Luther’s conception of the image of God now begins to appear.
The epistemological effect of it was that man’s knowledge is once more made to depend
in some measure upon something other than the personality and self-consciousness of
God. There are elements of Platonic Rationalism in Lutheranism. The spectre of an
independent sense world looms upon the horizon once more. Lutheranism has not learned
to interpret all reality in exclusively eternal categories. Man is given originality at the
expense of God.
A further corroboration and development of this charge is found in the Lutheran
conception of the person of Christ, and more specifically, in the way the two natures of
Christ are thought of. According to Lutheranism, Christ’s two natures blend entirely. The
human nature as well as the divine is thought of as being present in the elements of the
Lord’s supper. Krauth goes to great lengths to make clear the exact meaning of the
Lutheran view of the presence of Christ in the sacraments. He tells us that Lutheranism
never believed in impanation, subpanation or consubstantiation either as (a) local
conjunction of two bodies or (b) as commingling of two bodies. The charge that the
Lutheran conception of the relation of the two natures violates the notion of the ordinary
substance-attribute relation, he says, is not to the point. Now we should be very careful
when seeking to state the Lutheran position on the sacraments, because it is to them a
matter of great importance. Moreover, Lutherans make much of the importance of their
doctrine on this point because they see truly that far-reaching conclusions may and must
be drawn from it. Krauth makes bold to assert that the true doctrine of the incarnation and
the Trinity stand or fall with the Lutheran doctrine of the sacrament. He says: “To say
that the nature of Christ is personally present without his humanity is to deny that his
humanity is part of his personality and the doctrine of the incarnation falls to the dust.” 2
From this discussion of Krauth it is clear that we need not take time to speak of the
differences involved in the words impanation, subpanation and consubstantiation in order
to establish our contention. Krauth does not hesitate to say that according to Lutheran
doctrine, the human nature was part of the personality of Christ. In this Lutheranism goes
contrary to the Chalcedon creed. In the Chalcedon creed the words “without confusion,
without conversion or change” are directed against the Eutychian heresy which taught
that there was only one nature in Christ. Now Lutheranism to be sure, asserts two natures
in Christ, and therefore cannot be identified with Eutychianism, but it remains fair to say
what Dr. Gerhart said that “the Lutheran view is in the line of the ancient Eutychian ... ” 3
With all the refinements of the terminology employed as, e.g., that Christ is present, not
in the natural mode, but in a supernatural mode, it remains a fact that according to the
Lutheran position the human can become the divine. And that is the crux of the matter.
That is a distinctly dangerous doctrine. That is antitheistic in origin and in tendency. It
not only involves, but is, an open avowal in the intermingling of the eternal and the
temporal. It is once more in line with the Greek idea of the independent existence of the
temporal.
In consonance with this eternizing of the temporal, Schneckenburger speaks of a
temporizing of the eternal on the part of Lutheranism. He brings this out in his discussion
of the difference between the Reformed and the Lutheran view on the question of the
perseverance of the saints. Lutheranism does not believe in the perseverance of the saints,
he says. It holds to certainty for the moment, but believes that it is quite possible for a
man to be actually saved at one time and actually lost at some later date. This position of
Lutheranism he then traces back to its conception of the relation of time and eternity in
general. “Est ist neben dem sittlichen das religio speculative, welche ihre ganze
Anschauung vom Verhaltnisse des Endlichen und zeitlich Gegenwartigen zum
unendlichen und Ewigen durchzieht. Das Absolute ist selbst dem Processe des endlichen
Geistes immanent, nicht ein davon in abstracter Bewegungslosigkeit fern bleidendes;
darum das unmittelbare Selbstbewusstsein des litzteren ein wahres, sowohl als
Bewusstsein der Sunde wie als Bewusstsein der Kindschaft durch die Rechtfertigung.
Diese Immanenz des Gotlichen im endlichen Geiste Schliest nun in sich die Moglichkeit
furdenselben, sich in’s Gegenteil umzusetzen.” 4
Here Schneckenburger, who himself favors the Lutheran position, asserts that
according to Lutheranism, the eternal can be temporized and the temporal can be
eternized. The infinite enters into the finite and thus gives it reality. When the infinite has
really come into the heart of the believer, he is happy and rejoices, but when the infinite
withdraws, the salvation has also disappeared and joy is no more. Thus we find that
instead of eradicating the leaven of paganism, Lutheranism once more returns with
longing eyes to the fleshpots of Egypt. If there was need of anything, there was need of
an emphasis upon the absolute distinction between the eternal and the temporal if the
2
 cf. Krauth, The Conservative Reformation and Its Theology, p. 350.
3
 quoted by Charles Philip Krauth, op. cit., p. 475.
4
 cf. op. cit., p. 248.
difficulties of Platonic reasoning were to be avoided. And exactly here we are
disappointed in Lutheranism.
Then further we have said that Reformation epistemology was as a whole
characterized by a greater emphasis on the necessity of revelation for all human
knowledge than Scholasticism had been. But also in this respect we are disappointed in
Lutheranism. We saw that one of the weaknesses of Scholasticism was that it had a low
view of sin. According to Scholasticism it is possible for the sinner to have some true
knowledge of God even apart from redemptive revelation. We should therefore expect
that all the Reformers would emphasize the fact that ignorance is largely of sin, and not a
mere situation that is due to man’s finite character. Yet we find that according to Krauth,
“Ignorance is the counterpart to the divine knowledge and wisdom; weakness to divine
omnipotence; but sin is set over against the very heart and moral glory of God.” 5 Now
we admit that ignorance can in a sense be set in opposition to the knowledge of God. We
are finite, and by virtue of that fact, the area of our knowledge must always be limited.
But our ignorance insofar as it involves faulty knowledge of God is not due to our
finiteness, but is due to our sinfulness. And it is this that Krauth forgets to mention.
It is for these reasons that those who have sought to contrast the genius of
Lutheranism with the genius of Calvinism have stated that Calvinism has emphasized the
authority of Scripture more than Lutheranism has. Lutheranism has been less insistent
than Calvinism on the necessity of special revelation for every sphere of human
knowledge, and for that reason too, Lutheranism has been less insistent on the concept of
an absolute self-consciousness of God than Calvinism has been.
This fact is of the utmost practical religious significance, not only remotely because a
false epistemology is bound to result in a false view of religion, but also immediately for
the consciousness of the possession of eternal life. Lutheran writers emphasize the fact
that in their communion it is possible to live in joyous possession of the consciousness of
God’s favor. This is no doubt true, but it is also true that in the Lutheran communion one
may lose that joy at any moment of human unfaithfulness. The joy of the Lutheran in this
respect may be compared to the joy of a child who is in possession of a newly obtained
treasure. This joy is genuine as long as it lasts, but when the possession falls to the floor,
the child thinks that it has fallen into the bottomless void, and the consequent sorrow is
all the greater. “De Luthersche leeft als een kind, dat in den lach der vadergunst het
oogenblik geniet; de Gereformeerde als een man, in weins bewusten geest de eeuwige
glorie Gods haar schynsel werpt.” 6 The Lutheran is certain of his salvation when he feels
the influx of the divine person of Christ surging in his soul. Then he is actually justified.
But at a later time he has actually fallen away, and is no longer justified. This whole
procedure reminds us too easily of the rarefaction and condensation of Anaximenes to fit
in well with a Christian theistic scheme of thought.
We are very fortunate in this connection that Schneckenburger furnishes us with the
most fundamental reason for the entire position of Lutheranism on this matter of the
relation of the eternal to the temporal. He does this by placing Reformed theology before
the dilemma of making all human morality unreal, or finding a dualism in God. His
argument here is identical in form with the common argument against the whole of the
5
 Op. cit., p. 379.
6
 cf. G. Vos, De Verbondsleer in the Gereformeerde Theologie, p. 41.
Christian theistic position, namely, that if an absolute God created the universe, we could
not think of this universe as having any significance at all. If a bucket is already filled it
is impossible to add to it. If God was self-sufficient and all-glorious before he created the
world, then the world could not add to God’s glory. It is thus that Schneckenburger
argues with respect to morality. He says that the Reformed theologians are placed before
the dilemma of reducing all moral antitheses that is practically do away with morality, or
of placing the duality of moral antitheses in God. This dilemma Lutheranism is said to
escape because it does not start with such a sharp separation between the temporal and
the eternal as the Reformed position does. Schneckenburger says, “Indem aber die
reformierte Ansicht jene im Processe des Werdens ermassigt und ans diesem Verfaren
keinesweges uner hebliche Vortheile zieht verfallt sie dem Dilemma, entweder auch den
sittlichen Gegensatz zu ermassign, oder dann ihr zu einem ausserweltlichen Gegensatze
in Gott selbst werden zu lassen, also die Gottesidee selbst Dualistsch zu bestimmen, i.e.,
auseinander zu sprengen, und dem entsprechend wiederum in die Welt einen verdechten
Gegensatz fast manichaischer der Verdemnten und Leligan entladet.” 7
In this argument of Schneckenburger’s we have not only a revival of the most
fundamental question of epistemology, but also a revival of the Scholastic way of dealing
with it. The question at issue between theistic and antitheistic epistemology is exactly
this—whether or not unity and diversity may be thought of as existing in equal ultimacy
in the bosom of the Trinity. True theism says that it does, and antitheism says that it does
not. Antitheism says that the source of ultimate plurality lies beyond God. The temptation
is ever at hand for theists to fall into antitheistic argumentation at this point. The reason
for this temptation is that we have plurality with us, and it seems lo be an ultimate
something. At any rate, it seems to be the scientific procedure to start with this plurality
as something ultimate that we must explain as best we can. But it is forgotten that this is
exactly the question in dispute, and that it will not do to take the antitheistic argument for
granted as the right answer. Theists themselves forget that they are lending comfort to the
enemy if they debate this question among themselves as perfectly debatable. It is
debatable with antitheists. With them it is the most important question that could be
debated. But it is undebatable among theists because they are already on the antitheistic
side the moment they begin debating it. Thus we saw that when the Scholastics reopened
the question of the universals in its most fundamental aspect as the question of the locus
of the ultimate harmony of the one and the many, they therewith ipso facto fell into an
antitheistic argument. Thus the very fact that they started the argument among themselves
was evidence of their lapse into antitheistic speculation.
Exactly the same thing holds for the argument of Schneckenburger. If he and all
Lutherans want to stand on the side of the Protestant position when it comes to the
doctrine of creation, as they no doubt do, there is no further justification for them to use
this type of argumentation against their brethren of the Reformed persuasion. If they did
use it, there would be no good reason for them to expect mercy at the hands of antitheists
if they should use that type of argument against the doctrine of creation. The whole of the
antitheistic argument is based upon this one assumption that if unity is to be found in
experience, it must be found in an intermixture of the categories of time and eternity. The
whole of the antitheistic position assumes that words must be used simply univocally or
7
 Op. cit., p. 232.
simply equivocally. Or, if they are said to be used analogically, this means that the idea
of analogy is a compound of abstract univocism and of abstract equivocism. Accordingly,
antitheism says that no real historical antitheses can exist unless they exist in history
alone, or if also in eternity, then the same way in eternity that they exist in time. Theism,
on the other hand, holds that the solution of the problem of moral antitheses lies in the
eternal alone. The problem of moral antitheses is only a greater specification of the
general problem of creation. History can have meaning only if the whole of the temporal
universe is brought forth by an absolute God. For this reason alone, moral antitheses in
history are real and have significance. If one would maintain that only on the supposition
of an absolute God can history have any meaning at all, he must with equal insistence
maintain that only upon the presupposition of an absolute God can moral antitheses have
any significance.
Our answer to the dilemma before which Schneckenburger would place us is that we
do not and need not accept the dilemma as a genuine one. On the contrary, the fact that
Schneckenburger places us before it puts upon him the obligation to answer all the
objections that we have urged against antitheism in general. By placing such a dilemma
before us, Schneckenburger has not advanced the cause of Protestantism and Christian
theism, but has retarded it. What we needed more than anything else was a clear insight
on the part of all Christian theists into this their most fundamental point in order to
proceed to other matters. As long as Christian theists are not clear on this issue, there is
little hope for progress. Doubt on this question is itself the best and the saddest evidence
that Plato and Aristotle have not been outgrown. Doubt on this question is an attempt to
do what Plato found impossible of accomplishment, i.e., to find harmony in his third
mode of reasoning, the intermingling of the categories.
With this background of Lutheran epistemology we may now turn to an examination
of a work that deals with the subject of epistemology directly from a biblical standpoint.
The work of Dr. Phil Karl Francke, Metanoetik deals with human thought that has been
regenerated from sin.
Francke’s starting point is 2 Corinthians 5.17: “Therefore if any man be in Christ
Jesus, he is a new creature, old things are passed away; behold all things are become
new.” He speaks accordingly of regenerated thought that is radically changed. This
change is designated in the New Testament with the term metanoein.
Francke’s interest is not in seeking to determine the ethical consequences of
regeneration so much as it is in seeking to determine the nature of the “purely noetical”
consequences of regeneration.
The three main divisions of the book deal with the necessity, the possibility, and the
actuality, respectively, of regenerated thought.
In the first section, the author collects the biblical materials that have bearing on the
blinding effects of sin. The author brings out very well the fact that non-regenerated
thought seeks at one time to know all reality, and at another time maintains that nothing
can be known. “Einerseits soll es Wahrheit uberhaupt nicht erkennen, anderseits
umspannen, was hoher als der Himmel, tiefer als die Unterwelt.“Jb 22.7 ff. This is the
point to which we have called attention by saying that antitheistic thought wants to use
language univocally or give up the possibility of knowledge altogether. Antitheistic
thought will no longer be receptive. “Es will sich nicht mehr passiv und rezeptiv
verhalten.” 8 Accordingly, it loses itself in the artificial fabrication of insoluble
antinomies. It refuses any help from God. It will accept nothing but what has come out of
the depth of its own wisdom.
The stages throughout which this process of sinful thought comes to its completion
are three. The first stage is that of deceit, apaty. This deceitfulness of sin may be
subdivided into the deceitfulness of philosophy, Colossians 2.8; the deceitfulness of
riches, Matthew 13.22; and the deceitfulness of false morality, 2 Thessalonians 2.10. It is
this first stage that places the seeds of separation from God in the heart of man. The
second stage is that of erring in thought, plany. Psalm 95.10 speaks of a people that do
always err in their hearts. The same thought is expressed by Isaiah when he says, “All we
like sheep have gone astray.” It was this “spirit of error” (1 Jn 4:6) that moved the false
prophets of old to oppose the realization of the kingdom of God. Error gives a more
external expression to that which lives in the heart through deceit. The third stage is that
of stupor, katanuxis. This marks the climax of the process of antitheistic thought. To it
the wisdom of God is foolishness. It hardens the heart (Rom 11:25). Truth is obnoxious
to the victim of the spirit of stupor. It closes the ears to the witnesses of the Truth (Is
9:10). This third stage is often given to men as a punishment for falling into the earlier
stages (Rom 1:26–27). In this third stage the first and second stages reach their natural
climax. It may therefore be said that the first stage is the determining point of it all. It is
not only when matters have come to such a pass as is portrayed in Romans, the first
chapter, that God is displeased. Since the third stage is often the result of a punishment of
the first and second stages, it follows that in the eyes of the Lord it is the first stage that is
already decisive. At first this natural thought will not see and hear, and at last it can not
see and hear. 9
We see then that the picture of the noetic effect of sin as painted by Francke is black
enough. Yet we notice too that the Lutheran conception of man’s independence underlies
the whole discussion. Man, as it were, starts this whole course of error without any
relation to God’s plan. Francke will, of course, grant the doctrine of creation, but he fails
to see the full significance of it. He says that God had to respect the freedom he himself
had given to his creatures. “Er muss die ihm schopfungmassig garantierte Freiheit
respektieren.” 10 And this freedom is interpreted as meaning that man can do anything he
pleases without any reference to God. The whole process of deflection is pictured as
beyond God’s operation till he sees fit to intervene when things have gone too far.
This independence of man is still more apparent when we come to the second section
of the book which deals with the possibility of regenerated thought. After the dark picture
given of the position of sinful man, it would certainly seem that only God could take the
initiative in the process of restoration if there is to be any. The “natural man” would seem
to be so dead that it would require the Holy Spirit to blow into his nostrils the breath of
life. We thought we saw the natural man as dead in trespasses and sins, i.e., as a corpse.
But we were mistaken. The “corpse” is not a corpse. It breathes and moves. Not only did
God have to respect the freedom given at Creation, but even the sinner is given strength
to seek for and desires the truth, apart from the operation of the Holy Spirit. Of his own
8
 p. 14.
9
 Op. cit., p. 4.
10
 Op. cit., p. 48.
accord he “comes to himself” and reflects upon his lost condition without any help from
the Holy Spirit. Not as though the natural man could get out of his predicament without
the help of the Spirit. “Die daemonischen Geister des Irreals konnen nur durch Mittel
und Krafte eines uberdaemonischen d. I. gottlichen Geistes verbannt werden.” 11 But the
sinner seeing his predicament can at least cry for help. There is a longing to get out of the
misery and into the truth. Here Francke is unbiblical and pelagianizing in his thought.
True, there is in the “natural man” a point of contact for the Spirit. That point of contact
lies in man’s being made in the image of God. But man’s “rationality” is itself vitiated by
sin, and therefore can in no sense commence operations in the right direction. This
“rationality” must be given a new life before it can breathe spiritually, as it is supposed to
breathe.
Francke establishes his point, he thinks, by referring to Christ’s promise to the
apostles that he would give unto them the Spirit of Truth. He also pictures Paul’s crying
for release from his awful conflict with sin as an instance of the natural man seeking
light. But these examples only prove the poverty of an argument of this sort. The
apostles, with the exception of Judas, were true disciples of Christ, according to his own
word. We would naturally expect that they would ask for the Spirit of Truth. And Paul
tells us in the immediate context of Romans 7.14, that the new life within him is seeking
to throw off the bondage to the remnants of the old man that he finds within himself
against his will. Thus Paul thought of himself very definitely as a regenerated man when
he uttered that famous cry for relief. So then, the very examples adduced in proof are the
best of testimony that the position of Francke is unbiblical. Moreover, if man is really
unable to seek God by nature, as Francke himself said that he was, where did this new
ability to seek God suddenly come from? Either we must accept the exegesis of Francke
in his first section in which he portrays the result of Sill seriously, and reject his second
section as in opposition to it, or we must maintain his second section and hold that in his
first section he was all the while clinging to a false independence idea. And it would
seem fair to choose the second alternative, since Francke is most anxious to reserve for
man a freedom as a creature by which he is able to do all manner of things that seem to
be beyond God’s control.
Francke’s argument may be called the very opposite of that of Luther in The Bondage
of the Will Luther proves in great detail that man is by nature unable to do ally good. And
we have seen that in many ways the argument of Francke in the first section of his book
resembles that argument of Luther. But the swerving from the first to the second position
on the part of Francke resembles that which we saw happening when the semi-
mechanism or Luther turned soon into the synergism of Melanchthon. In both cases it
was really a development rather than a reversal. And it could not be a development if
there were not already some germ of the second position found in the first position.
We may say then that in the second section of his book Francke is unfaithful to the
redemptive principle as a whole. If one maintains a soteriological theory in which the
“natural man” is conceived of as able of his own accord to seek the truth because he has a
true insight into his sorrowful condition, one cannot but become antitheistic
epistemologically, in the sense that he must think of certain facts as existing in such a
way that man can have knowledge of them without having knowledge of the true God. If
11
 Op. cit. p. 51.
no one can come to the Father but by Christ, and no one can say Christ to be Lord except
through the Spirit, it is equally possible or equally impossible for man to come into
contact with the Father or the Son or the Spirit. If one maintains that he can approach
Christ of his own accord even if he is a sinner, he may as well say that he can approach
the Father too. And if one can say that he knows what the fact of sin means without the
enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, he may as well say that he can know other facts without
reference to God. In fact he may as well say that he can know any and every fact without
reference to God. If one fact can be known without reference to God there is no good
reason to hold that not all facts can be known without reference to God. When the
elephant of naturalism once has his nose in the door, he will not be satisfied until he is all
the way in.
At this point we must note another source of the failure on the part of Francke to be
consistently Christian theistic. Francke does not have an organic conception of the
relation of the Old and the New Testaments. He identifies the desire for the Spirit of
Truth as he thinks it exists in the “natural man” with the desire on the part of Old
Testament saints for the fulness of the promise of the Shiloh, as given in Genesis 49.10.
But such an identification presupposes that these Old Testament saints rather were
unbelievers, while we are told that Abraham is the father of the faithful. Hence, his
appeal to the Old Testament saints weakens rather than strengthens his position. And his
further argument that as this longing for the Shiloh became ever stronger and stronger in
the course of the history of the Old Testament, so the longing for the truth on the part of
the “natural man” may become constantly stronger, also falls to the ground. “The natural
man can learn to wait for the Spirit of Truth.” 12 This view of the natural man as
conscious of the end he has in view, that is, of seeking the Truth and then praying for it,
is about as tar remote from the picture Scripture gives of the “natural man” as it could be.
Once start on the decline and there is no stopping. Facile est descensus in Averno.
That Francke, in the last analysis, has no very deep conception of sin is further
evidenced by the fact that he minimizes original sin. The thought of the “natural man” is
not sinful, he says, because it has been born in sin, but because it has in each person
actually committed sin. To him the conception of inherited sin is a logical contradiction.
13
 This is an important point epistemologically: Why should original sin be considered a
logical contradiction? It can be so considered only if it is taken for granted that personal
representation is an impossible conception. We are not now concerned to prove that the
principle of personal representation is biblical. That cannot easily be denied by anyone
who reads Romans 5.12. “There as through one man sin entered into the world, and death
through sin: and so death passed unto all men, for all that sinned” (Rom 5:12). We are
only concerned to show why this representational principle can be denied only on the
supposition that a personal act must necessarily be an unipersonal act. One either
maintains that human personal thought and action is representative, convenantal thought
and action, because man is enveloped at every point by the claims of God; or, one, in
effect, maintains that human personal thought and action is autonomous. On this view,
ally personal act must be the act of the person as acting alone. It must be unipersonal. An
12
 “Da naturliche Denken kann die Kunst lernen, auf den Geist der Wahrheit zu warten.
Und wo dieses sich unwillkurlich zum bitten um denselbed,” op. cit., p. 56.
13
 Op. cit., p. 73.
act can be truly personal only if the surroundings of the person be impersonal. To be truly
personal on this view, there really should be no more than one person. If there were more
than one person, the surroundings would not be entirely impersonal, and to that extent the
act would not be fully personal. And this reduces the position to an absurdity, because if
there were only one person there could be no personal relationship at all. It were quite
legitimate and true to say that the foundation of all personal activity among men must be
based upon the personality of one ultimate person, namely, the person of God, if only it
be understood that this ultimate personality of God is a triune personality. In the Trinity
there is completely personal relationship without residue. And for that reason it may be
said that man’s actions are all personal too. Man’s surroundings are shot through with
personality because all things are related to the infinitely personal God. But when we
have said that the surroundings of man are really completely personalized, we have also
established the fact of the representational principle. All of man’s acts must be
representational of the acts of God. Even the persons of the Trinity are mutually
representational. They are exhaustively representational of one another. Because he is a
creature, man must, in his thinking, his feeling and his willing, be representative of God.
There is no other way open for him. He could, in the nature of the case, think nothing at
all unless he thought God’s thoughts after him, and this is representational thinking. Thus
man’s thought is representative of God’s thought, but not exhaustively representative.
The doctrine of original sin is based upon this purely theistic, because purely biblical,
concept of representation. Since the whole being of God, if we may in all reverence say
so, is built upon the representational plan, it was impossible for God to create except
upon the representational plan. This pertains to every individual human being, but it
pertains just as well with respect to the race as a whole. If there was to be a personal
relationship between finite persons—and none other is conceivable—there would have to
be representational relationship. Every act of every finite person affects every act of
every finite person that comes after him by virtue of the one general plan of God with
respect to the whole of creation. Hence, it could not be otherwise than that the acts of
Adam should affect, representationally, every human being that should come after him.
We say that it could not be, because we are told in Scripture that this is the case. We are
not establishing any possibilities by a line of reasoning that is independent of Scripture.
To reject the doctrine of original sin may therefore be characterized as a concession to
the antitheistic idea that the acts of human personalities are surrounded by a universe over
which God has no complete control, i.e., all impersonal universe. Thus it comes to pass
that the rejection of the doctrine of original sin on the part of Francke is merely another
indication and proof that our interpretation of his idea of the “natural man” is correct. If
there is an element of antitheistic thinking at one point, it is sure to reappear elsewhere. A
suit of clothes usually shows signs of wear at several places simultaneously.
Summing up the whole teaching of Francke on the question of the possibility of
renewed thought, we may say that according to him, the possibility of renewal does not
lie so much in the fact that the Holy Spirit is all-powerful—though this is a sine qua
non—as in the fact that the “natural man” is after all quite powerful for good because he
always remains a rational creature, and no rational creature is ever quite helpless. Francke
has given to man a vicious independence to begin with. Hinc illae lacrimae!
Summing up the whole of Lutheran epistemology, as far as we have discussed it, our
conclusion can be none other than that Lutheran epistemology has not lived up to its early
promise. There is in Lutheranism a great advance upon the Scholastic position. And that
advance is found in every direction. Yet that advance might have been much greater if
Lutheranism had the courage to carry the Reformation farther than it did. At some stages
of the process Lutheranism speaks as though there were matters that pertain to the
welfare of man without affecting the position of God. Lutheranism has not been quite
theistic enough in the sense of making God the completely original and exclusively
original personality which serves as a foundation for the meaning of every bit of human
predicate. Lutheranism has never quite escaped the third method of Platonic reasoning,
i.e., in a mixture of eternal and temporal categories.
Chapter 7:
Historical Survey:
D. Modern Epistemology: Arminianism
There is one point that must have become increasingly clear in the discussion of
Scholasticism and Lutheranism, and that is that the development of a consistently
Christian theistic epistemology is retarded if the biblical conception of the noetic effects
of sin is not accepted at face value. And the reason why Christians often fail to allow the
full extent of the noetic influence of sin is that they have assumed that man has powers of
such independence that he could never come under the bondage of sin to such an extent
as not to do something toward the removal of that bondage. We shall now find that
Arminian epistemology is insufficiently Christian theistic, and therefore cannot be
expected to carry forward the Reformation motif just because it is weak on its conception
of the nature of man and on the nature of the fall of man.
In discussing Arminian epistemology we limit ourselves to a brief review of the
works of Watson, Miley, and Curtis. Each of these men may be regarded as fairly
representative of a large section of Arminian believers at the time of his writing.
Watson’s work is a standard on systematic theology. It is very scholarly, thorough
and orthodox. In other words, in Watson we have Arminianism at its best. If we do not
find a truly Christian theistic statement of epistemology in Watson, we need not expect to
find it elsewhere. We do not expect a detailed discussion of epistemology in a work on
systematic theology, but since there are no monographs written by Arminians that deal
directly with the subject, it is naturally to works on systematic theology that we turn. Nor
are we disappointed. Watson has many sections in his work that deal with
epistemological subjects. On this point much more can be found in Watson’s Theological
Institutes than in W. B. Pope’s Compendium of Christian Theology.
The very first part of Watson’s book which deals with the question of revelation is
very important for our purpose. Watson naturally asks why it is that revelation should be
necessary for man. His answer is that revelation is necessary because the heathen had
confused notions of morality, and because the state of religion was everywhere low
previous to the coming of revelation. These reasons given for the necessity of revelation
would seem to indicate that Watson is speaking of special revelation, because they deal
with the state of morals and religion. But it is significant that Watson does not tell us
outright whether he is referring to general or to special revelation. Do his arguments
about the low state of religion and morality seek to prove the necessity of general
revelation too? If that be the case, it would imply that even man as a creature before he
had become a sinner was already imperfect, for general revelation, in the nature of the
case, has nothing to do with sin. Now we soon find that Watson refers in his discussion of
revelation to general as well as to special revelation. He says that the very existence of
God must be proved by a posteriori arguments, and that even when using these
arguments, we are dependent upon the revelation of God. 1
1
 cf. Institutes, 1, p. 335.
Before long we learn that it is not doubtful what Watson’s fundamental position is on
the nature of man and the nature of the fall of man. It is in accordance with Watson’s
conception of the creation of man and his view of sin that he argues indiscriminately for
both kinds of revelation. Says he: “No creature can be absolutely perfect because it is
finite, and it would appear from the example of our first parents that an innocent and in
its kind a perfect being, is kept from falling only by taking hold on God, and as this is an
act, there must be a determination of the will in it, and so when the least tempering with
the desire of forbidden gratifications is induced, there is always an enemy at hand to
darken the judgment and to accelerate the progress of evil.” 2
From this citation there are two main points that we learn. We learn that according to
Watson, finitude of necessity involves evil. This point is of the utmost importance. It
explains at once why Watson reasoned as he did for the necessity of revelation. If evil
and finitude necessarily go together, there is no longer any distinction possible between
an argument for general and an argument for special revelation. In that case, a human
being just because he is a human being needs a Savior. To be sure his fall into open sin at
the very outset of the course of history aggravates the seriousness of the situation, but it
remains a fact that he would need a Savior even if he had not fallen into this open sin at
once. A man that is by virtue of his creation imperfect could not help but go from worse
to worse, since there was always an “enemy at hand” to accelerate the process. Thus the
incarnation would have been necessary apart from the fact of sin. All the difficulties of
pagan thought lurk around the corner here. First and foremost among these difficulties is
the spectre of a sense world that is independent of God. If God is the sole creator of the
sense world, there is no reason why this sense world can not be inherently perfect. And if
this sense world is thought of as independent of God in any sense, we may as well say
that it is independent of God in every sense. So we see that if we hold to the idea that
finitude of necessity includes evil, we have not solved any question except by making
more serious ones. For if we grant independent reality to the sense world, we shall have
to try all three of the Platonic methods of reasoning again and find them wanting.
The second point we should note with respect to the quotation from Watson leads to
the same conclusions as the first. We refer to what may perhaps be called the most
important element in the whole of Arminian theology, or at least the most characteristic
element, namely, that man’s will and rationality include his ability to change the actual
course of events as planned by God. Arminian theology attributes to man such powers as
to enable him to do things that were not in the plan of God. That this is a fair way of
putting the matter can be seen from the fact that Arminianism definitely maintains that if
the choice before which man was placed was to have real significance, it would have to
involve two possibilities. Now with respect to these two absolutely ultimate possibilities,
it should be observed that as far as God’s relation to these possibilities is concerned, there
are three and only three ways in which we could think of this relation. We could conceive
(a) that it was God’s plan that man should not fall into sin. If that is the case, then man
clearly did that which was beyond the plan of God. In other words, in that case there are
facts that are beyond God’s knowledge. Thus God is not the centralizing and unifying
factor in human knowledge, and this unity must be found in man where we have seen it
can never be found. (b) In the second place, we might conceive that it was within God’s
2
 Theological Institutes, Vol. 1, p. 33.
plan that man should fall into sin. In that case, freedom of choice can not be what the
Arminian says that it is, because in that case the choice of man was clearly within the
plan of God. Finally, (c) we might conceive that both possibilities were within the plan of
God. In that case, too, the choice of man falls by definition within the Plan of God. Thus
the Arminian is placed before the dilemma of revising his conception of freedom or
assuming responsibility for all the difficulties of antitheistic thought that we have
discussed before.
If someone should prefer to start with the fact of sin instead of with the plan of God in
order to ascertain the relationship between the two, the result would be the same. We may
say that sin was or that sin was not within the plan of God. If it was, then the Arminian
idea of choice is clearly untenable, inasmuch as choice must then mean something that is
consistent with the plan of God. If sin was not in the plan of God, then by definition we
have facts that are beyond the control of God, and we are on antitheistic ground.
We cannot but feel that Watson has turned his face in the direction of antitheism
when he so strongly emphasizes the independence of man’s original powers.
That our conclusion with respect to the dangers of Platonic reasoning is no mere
fictitious one appears from Watson’s conception of time. Platonic reasoning, we say,
rests upon an intermixture of the categories of time and eternity. Or, we may say, Platonic
reasoning assumed that all predicates must be used univocally. Now this is exactly what
Watson does. He says, “Duration then, as applied to God, is no more than an extension of
the idea as applied to ourselves; and to exhort us to conceive of it as something
essentially different, is to require us to conceive what is inconceivable.” 3 We do not
maintain that Watson’s standpoint here is that of modern philosophy which holds that the
space-time continuum is the matrix of all reality, but we do maintain that there is
something of the same motif present in Watson’s position. His reasoning is a clear
instance of reasoning univocally. What is conceivable and what is not conceivable cannot
be thus limited by what the human mind can comprehensively grasp. It is true that we
cannot understand how time can be real for God without his being subject to time. Yet it
is equally true that unless we may conceive of a God who thinks in higher categories than
those in which we think, we shall have no harmony for our experience at all. To think of
a God who is above time is not to think the inherently inconceivable thought; it is only to
think of what is above our comprehension. Thus this very reasoning of Watson about the
nature of time only confirms our criticism that there is an antitheistic element in his
thinking.
Still further, corroboration of this judgment is found in Watson’s discussion of
soteriology. We have seen that according to Watson, Adam was by nature imperfect, and
had some inclinations to evil. This brings Adam down a good way from the high position
in which Scripture puts him. If we as Sinners Can be elevated to some degree without the
aid of the Spirit, the fall of man will have become less serious than we have grown
accustomed to think of it, and the salvation process will be more easy than it is pictured
in the Bible. The thing of utmost importance in this connection is once more the fact that
we as sinners have, according to Watson, retained that creaturely independence that, he
says, was characteristic of Adam. When the Holy Spirit seeks to save us, he may meet
with rebuff. We can, if we desire, reject the work of the Holy Spirit. Thus we are once
3
 Op. cit., 1, p. 337.
more face to face with the question spoken of above, whether or not actions occur that are
beyond the plan of God. If our faith is within the plan of God, it cannot be the result of
the type of freedom that Arminianism desires because it cannot in that case be said that it
would have been equally possible for us to disbelieve as to believe. In that case our
choices and moral actions in general have genuine significance because they are within
the plan of God. On the other hand, if our faith is not within the plan of God, things are
by definition happening that are beyond the plan of God, and we are ipso facto on
antitheistic ground. Moreover, in the latter case we would have the unique situation that
faith, which is a thing much desired by God, should be occurring beyond his will and
plan. Or again, we may say that our unbelief is either included in the plan of God or it is
not. If it is not, we have facts happening beyond God once more. If it is, then unbelief is
genuine unbelief because of the fact that it is related to the plan of God.
Every act of every human being must be related to the plan of God or it would have
no significance at all. And this holds good of acts of unbelief as well as of acts of belief.
Acts of unbelief are even “unthinkable” except in relation to God, inasmuch as they are
acts of unbelief against God. To say that that which is against God is beyond God’s plan
is to offer to us the whole of the Platonic position with respect to a sense world that exists
in independence of God. It is then but fair that we use one or all of Plato’s methods of
reasoning. We cannot at one time enjoy the freedom of antitheism, and when we are
cornered, turn to the theistic position for comfort.
When Watson describes the work of Christ and of the Holy Spirit this independence
of man appears again. Watson militates against the idea that Christ’s active obedience is
imputed unto us. That conception, he thinks, would violate our freedom and lead to
antinomianism. Christ has, according to Watson, done no more than remove the obstacles
in the way of our salvation. So we can now either accept or reject the salvation that is
offered to us. Not as though the regenerating work of the Spirit is “a change wrought in
man—by which the dominion of sin over him is broken, so that with free choice of will
he serves God.” Thus, the work of the Holy Spirit as well as the work of Christ is limited
to the removal of obstacles. It is thus that at the most critical juncture man’s freedom as
autonomous is safeguarded. It is all along the line of contact between God and man
assumed that if man’s moral deeds are to be real, the choice before which man is placed
must involve the possibility of doing deeds that are beyond God’s plan. To this extent
Arminianism has no valid objection to raise against anti-Christian thinking.
A particularly subtle form of false univocal reasoning is found in Arminian thought
when just in this connection it is maintained that the very fact that God commands men
everywhere to repent implies that they are able to do so because God would never ask
men to do things that they cannot do. But to say that God never asks of men that which
they cannot do may be taken in a true, and it may be taken in a false, sense. The statement
is true in the absolute sense because God once gave man the ability to do what he asked
him to do. That man is no longer able to do what he should do is no disproof of the rule.
Moreover, to those to whom he comes with the gospel call, he offers at the same time the
aid through which man can obey that call. But the statement that God never asks anything
of man but what man is able to perform is false, if it is taken to mean that man can, of his
own accord, do that which is asked. One cannot, without argument, take the statement to
refer to this sort of ability. This sort of ability would fit in with an essentially antitheistic
system of thought, but not with an essentially theistic system of thought. Before going on
to Miley we must stop to notice that Watson makes the bold claim for Arminianism that
it, better than Calvinism, preserves the biblical doctrine of total depravity. If that were so,
all our criticism would fall by the board, since the main thrust of our criticism has been
that the difficulties in Watson’s position were due to the fact that he failed to sense the
epistemological significance of the doctrine of total depravity. Watson says: “The true
Arminian, as fully as the Calvinist, admits the doctrine of the total depravity of human
nature in consequence of the fall of our first parents.” 4 More than that, Watson holds that
the peculiar advantage of Arminianism is that because it recognizes the good that is
visible in non-Christian people as being the work of the Spirit, it can maintain the
doctrine of total depravity better than the Calvinist can, because the latter system of
thought has to explain the good in the non-Christian by the artificial doctrine of common
grace.
In reply to this claim of Watson, we need only remark that the very point by which
Watson tries to prove that he has carried out the doctrine of total depravity proves that he
has really denied it. He says in effect that the good of the regenerate man is distinct in
degree only from the good of the non-regenerate man. This is a denial of the necessity of
special grace as something that is qualitatively distinct from the deeds of the “natural
man.” At any rate, it should be remembered in this connection that whatever the work of
the Spirit may be in the work of salvation, man can, according to Watson, resist that
work, and this is in itself a denial of the doctrine of total depravity. Watson’s emphasis on
the doctrine of total depravity is a happy inconsistency in the development of Arminian
theology. The mainstream of his thinking goes in the opposite direction.
We may now briefly look at Miley’s Systematic Theology.
In general we can sum up the theology of Miley by saying that he lays still stronger
emphasis upon the metaphysical independence of man, and that he tones down the
doctrine of total depravity which Watson was still anxious to maintain. The unhappy
result of toning down the doctrine of total depravity is that epistemology becomes less
Christian, and the unhappy result of emphasizing the metaphysical independence of man
is that epistemology becomes less theistic.
Miley brings Adam down from his high position given him in Scripture. Adam, so
Miley thinks, lived in a sort of pre-moral childish innocence. Adam’s nature “certainly
could contain no proper ethical element, such as can arise only from free personal
action.” 5 “Mere nature” cannot be the subject of ethical sinfulness and demerit. Adam
had a non-ethical and therefore non-meritorious holiness.
What this criticism of Miley really amounts to is that an act to be considered ethical
must occur in a vacuum. Or, in other words, according to this view, which is the common
Arminian view, an act to be moral or immoral, must take place in a completely
impersonal atmosphere. If the surroundings of an act were in any sense personal, that act
would no longer be free from some sort of influence and would not, because of that fact,
be ethical. Now suppose that there is beside the personality of man the personality of God
to be figured with. That God is admittedly there because of the fact that man has been
created by him. Such a God will certainly have a large influence on man, if not directly,
then indirectly by virtue of his control over the surroundings of man. Thus, man is not
4
 Op. cit., 1, p. 48.
5
 Op. cit., 1, p. 409.
free at all, and ethical action could never be set under way. More than that, Miley must
admit that man is not only indirectly but also directly under the influence of God by
virtue of creation. Man receives his very breath from his Creator. His every power of
thought must come from God. How then could man’s act be moral if it cannot be moral in
the atmosphere of God’s providence? So we see that the whole atmosphere of man is
surcharged with the personal. We may even say that the very creation of man could be
nothing but the creation of a character. Could an absolute God create an ethical act all by
itself? This question may mean either of two things. It may mean an ethical act in the
sense that Arminianism understands an ethical act; viz., that it be unrelated to any ethical
quality. Arminianism would have to believe in the creation of such an act. Arminianism
has rebelled against the idea of the creation of an ethical quality. According to
Arminianism, the beginning of ethical life would have to be an ethical act, because it
holds that to be ethical, the will of man must be exclusively responsible for what is done.
It should be observed that this bit of psychology of Arminianism implies much more
than is often realized. One cannot stop at this point of substituting the originality of the
ethical act of man for the originality of the ethical quality of man. The question of an
ethical standard comes up in this connection. Suppose that the act precedes the quality,
What will make the act ethical? Will conformity to the law of God? This will have to be
the standard of the act if man is the creature of God. But if the law of God is the standard
of the will because man has been created by God, and if the law of God can be the
standard of the ethical act only because man is God’s creature, then the ethical act is itself
created. And if the ethical act is created, it no longer answers to the requirements of
Arminian freedom. An ethical act that is created brings exactly the same problems as a
quality or character that is created. The arguments of Arminianism against a created
quality would apply with equal force to a created act. To be ethical according to the
requirements set by Arminianism, an act must be entirely self-originated, and this cannot
be the case if the doctrine of creation be maintained. And if the doctrine of creation be
denied there is no longer any ethical standard according to which an act might be
considered ethical. In other words, according to Arminianism, all act to be ethical should
imply the existence of human beings apart from God. Before Arminianism can make its
doctrine tenable, it will have to make the whole of the nontheistic system, which holds to
the existence of the universe apart from God, tenable too. And if Arminianism does not
wish to do this, if it wishes to retain the scriptural doctrine of creation, it cannot with
logical justice complain of the doctrine of created qualities. Thus we may say that God
could not create an ethical act it, that act is considered ethical only when operating in an
untheistic universe. And if, in the second place, we take the question whether God can
create an ethical act to mean whether God can create creatures whose deeds are in
correspondence with the will of God, the answer must be that he can, but that in that case
he can create ethical character too. In fact, then, he has created ethical character.
We have given this much consideration to the matter of the possibility of an original
ethical act because right here antitheism lurks around the corner. If one is not willing to
bear the reproach of the theistic system at this point, he cannot expect to find the
comforts of the theistic system later. The psychology of Arminianism is self-
contradictory because it is built upon an attempted combination of theistic and antitheistic
principles. According to the antitheistic conception of freedom, an act could not be
ethical unless it began in a void. Antitheism does not hesitate to hold that all reality has
come from the void. For an avowed antitheism it is therefore quite consistent to have this
sort of theory of the will. That it is utterly impossible to think rationally of an act
operating ethically in a void is but a specific form of the general criticism that we have
against the whole of the antitheistic system of thought; namely, that it holds bare
possibility to precede actuality. The biblical position holds God to be the source of all
possibility. But Arminianism has to stand on the side of the antitheists on this score and
receive the attack of the theists. Then it must turn about and bear the brunt of the attack
of the antitheists against the theistic position of the question of creation.
Thus we see that Miley, even more than Watson, was insistent on giving a false
metaphysical independence to man. It is not to be wondered at then, that Miley, more
than Watson, toned down the doctrine of sin. The one always accompanies the other. A
consistently theistic epistemology must be consistently Christian, and a consistently
Christian epistemology must be consistently theistic. If one maintains that there may have
been acts that are independent of the plan of God, it is but natural that one should also
maintain that there was an original evil that had nothing to do with the plan of God. In
Platonic thought the sense world existed in independence of God, and therefore evil is
traced to this sense world.
In much the same way we now find Miley thinking of evil as somehow coming into
man’s thoughts or already being in man as soon as he appeared on earth. According to
Miley, Adam’s nature was not only unethical to begin with, but there were in him
“susceptibilities toward temptation” which, says Miley, “while Adam and Eve were
constituted holy in their moral nature, the spontaneous tendencies of which were toward
the good, yet in their complete constitution there were susceptibilities toward temptation
which might be followed into sinful action.” 6 To be sure, there were moral forces that
acted as a restraint upon any tendencies toward evil. But the strength of these forces
depended upon proper conditions. These forces, love and fear, might become lax in their
duty of restraining evil tendencies. “But love is so operative only when in an active state.
This state is conditioned on a proper mental apprehension of God.” And now “the
constitution of primitive man did not necessitate such a constant apprehension of God. A
temporary diversion of thought was possible, and without sin. The temptation led to such
a diversion, and so clouded the vision of God as to prevent the practical force of love. In
this state, love could no longer counteract the impulses of awakened appetence, and
disobedience might follow.” 7 It is clear from the section out of which these quotations
are taken that, according to Miley, there were in original man tendencies to evil, and not
merely a susceptibility that might furnish a point of contact. If this were not so, there
would be nothing for the forces of love and fear of which he speaks to restrain. The
whole description Miley gives of the original condition of man looks like a modified
form of the Platonic theory of the soul with its good principles trying to keep in check its
evil principle.
Still further, the very fact that Miley attempts to give an independent psychological
explanation of the origin of evil in the soul of man is indicative of unfaithfulness to the
Christian theistic motif. No “psychology” of the origin of evil can be given. If man was
created perfect, as according to Scripture he was, there could be no moments in which
6
 Op. cit., 1, p. 434.
7
 Op. cit., 1, p. 435.
man’s intellectual apprehension of God was asleep, as Miley suggests. Nor could there be
any watching or restraining necessary of one aspect of man’s soul with respect to another
aspect of man’s soul. Such matters could be thought of only if man were not completely a
creature of God. In other words, such matters could be thought of only if there were a
sense world independent of God to begin with. If the entrance of evil in man’s heart be
explained by the fact of man’s finitude, this is nothing less than to agree with the
contention of the Greeks that evil must be as original as the good. That this is so may be
learned from the reasons that are given for holding that finitude of necessity involves
evil. There can be no other reason than that God could not create a perfect though finite
being. And why should God not be able to create a perfect though finite being? The only
answer that can be given is that there are conditions or laws beyond God according to
which he must make things if he makes them at all. This means that God is finite. If God
is not finite, there is no material and no law on which he is in any sense dependent in the
creation of finite beings, and there is no reason to hold that God could not have created
morally perfect beings.
In correspondence with Miley’s discussion of original man, is his discussion of
present man. Man as he exists, even after the entrance of sin, has retained the freedom
that he had by creation, and the same power to attend to the good that he had before the
fall. It is true that it is more difficult for the sinner to attend to the good than it was for
Adam, but he has the power to do it just the same. “The worldly mind can deeply concern
itself with heavenly things.” 8 Nor does this ability necessarily depend upon the grace of
God. “As for the question of moral freedom, it is indifferent whether this capacity be
native or gracious. For the consistency of Scripture Truth it must have been a gracious
original.” 9 Thus Adam is brought very close to us and we are brought very close to
Adam.
Miley has not left us to infer his position on the matter of original sin, but has devoted
a section in his book to the treatment of it. Miley does not hesitate to say that the older
Arminian theologians were inconsistent in teaching the doctrine of original sin. Arminius,
Fletcher, Watson, Watts, Pope, and Summer, he says, tried in vain to harmonize their
teaching of original sin with the leading principles of Arminianism. Speaking of Pope in
particular he says, “We thus find in Pope the maintenance of three distinct grounds of
common native sinfulness and damnableness. On the ground of a real oneness with Adam
and also on the ground of a representative oneness, we share the guilt and deserve the
penalty of his sin. The third ground is given in the intrinsic sinfulness of the depravity of
nature inherited from Adam. These views can neither be reconciled with each other, nor
with the determining principles of Arminianism.” 10 Miley’s point is that one who really
believes in the total depravity of man must also believe in the doctrine of election and
reprobation in the Calvinistic sense of these terms. In this judgment Miley is undoubtedly
correct. “A common native damnableness is in itself too thoroughly Augustinian for any
consistent place in the Arminian system.” 11 The usual way of seeking to harmonize
man’s depravity with the principle of free will as entertained by Arminianism has been,
8
 Op. cit., 2, p. 305.
9
 Ibid., p. 304.
10
 Ibid., p. 511.
11
 p. 512.
says Miley, to assert that Christ has died for all men. But this, he rightly holds, does not
touch the question. If man is free at one point to do things that are beyond the will and
plan of God, there is no reason to think that he has not that freedom at other points. If
man has the freedom that Arminianism says he has, he cannot be subject to the sin of
Adam. In that case, there could be no connection between the sin of Adam and his
posterity inasmuch as there is then no connection between anything. Arminian freedom
means freedom to do deeds that are beyond the plan of God, and if any deed is done
beyond the plan of God, its results will fly into the void because the deed itself is done in
the void. It is no wonder then that since Miley will not forsake his conception of freedom,
he finds it necessary to let the old conception of inherited sin go. If we assert a belief in
universal guilt but refuse to believe in election and reprobation, we must drop our belief
in universal guilt, or at the expense of consistency shun the question of man’s merit and
take refuge in the goal of universal atonement.
So Miley has succeeded in bringing Adam and the fallen man close together. Neither
is altogether holy, and neither is altogether guilty. Hence the need for a distinctly
Christian epistemology is practically done away with. Hence Miley’s arguments for the
necessity of revelation, as was the case with Watson’s arguments, do not distinguish
between the need for special revelation and the need for general revelation.
When we come to O. A. Curtis’s book, The Christian Faith, we find that he has still
further emphasized the Arminian freedom doctrine and has left behind him all the happy
evangelical inconsistencies that still marked the theology of Miley. Curtis seeks to bring
Arminian thinking up to date. He acknowledges the influence, among others, of the
personalism of Borden P. Bowne. In short, the theology of Curtis may well be called a
theological adjustment of philosophical personalism. Now personalism in philosophy is a
modification of Hegelian Idealism. And Hegelian Idealism is the logical development of
the Kantian creativity theory of thought which in turn is a logical development of the
Greek or generally antitheistic theory of human thought.
It should not appear strange, then, that modern Arminian theology has found it easy to
adapt itself to an up-to-date form of antitheistic thought such as Boston Personalism is.
Albert C. Knudson, dean of the Boston University School of Theology, wrote two articles
in The Christian Advocate of March 5 and March 12, 1931, in which he tried to show that
Methodist theology has been particularly fortunate in adapting itself to modern thought,
because from the beginning it was to an extent empiricistic in its method. He interprets
the emphasis of early Methodism upon the “primacy of religious experience” as
something that was bound to eventuate in a carelessness or a change of emphasis with
respect to the traditional doctrines of the church. “The full implications of this position
were not worked out by Wesley and the early Methodist theologians, nor have they even
yet been fully worked out. But we now see that a much greater modification of the
traditional evangelical theology, than the Methodists of century ago realized.” 12 More
athan that, Knudson tells us not only that this empirical emphasis of early Methodism was
bound to modify the old doctrines, but he also tells us to what this modification is bound
to lead. “The important thing here, however, is to note that the primacy of religious
experience, which may be said to be the basic principle of our church, makes theological
finality impossible, and that if we are to be true to this principle, our theology must
12
 p. 292.
continually adapt itself to the changing thought of the world—must, in a word, be
progressive.” 13
It will be recognized that the criticism we have given of the tendencies in Watson and
Miley’s theology correspond with the outline given by dean Knudson. The Augustinian
element and the Platonic element were grappling for the mastery in the history of
Arminian theology. The point Knudson makes is the most important one of the possibility
of what he is pleased to call “theological finality.” By that he does not mean and we do
not mean that one human being has absolute knowledge or authority. All that is meant is
that there is an absolute God who has absolute authority, who has spoken through Christ
in Scripture. Arminianism, we have seen, with its false independence concept has
attacked this fundamental doctrine of the absoluteness of God and of his revelation
through Christ in Scripture. And after that there is one further logical reason why a
completely relativistic position should not be taken. Arminian theology, it is no wonder,
has become “progressive.” But in still a different way, we can call attention to the fact
that Arminianism led, as Knudson says it did, to the empirical method of reasoning very
easily. All the difficulties of the Platonic types of reasoning that we have reviewed appear
on the scene again.
That all this is found in a well developed form in the theology of Curtis becomes at
once apparent if we notice his emphasis upon the independence of the human personality.
He says, “Self-decision is the most important feature of the entire personal process for the
simple reason that it is the culmination.” 14 No decision that not the ripest fruition of a
iscompletely self-conscious personality can strictly speaking be regarded as moral. The
experienced personality, complete self-consciousness alone, can be the basis of moral
appeal. Such, in brief, are Curtis’s views on personality. These views, it is evident, are
the result of an empirical investigation of the concept of personality as such, whether that
personality be human or divine. That is, Curtis has apparently not asked himself the
question whether it is possible to reason thus and be true to the theistic principle. Curtis’s
method implies that it makes no difference for the determination of the character of
human personality whether or not there is an absolute God. Thus Curtis is thoroughly
antitheistic to start with.
In the second place, he is equally anti-Christian. This appears from the fact that he
considers evil as a natural something. “Man naturally fears the supernatural wherever he
finds it, but because he is a free person he can do a greater thing than to create an
arbitrary augment, he can master by a venture of trust. This personal venture we call
faith.” 15 Thus Curtis reduced sin to the level of auto-suggestion. The need for
righteousness of which he speaks has nothing to do with sin but since righteousness is a
part of a complete personality it too must be realized in the natural course of the
development of personality.
Curtis’s theology as a whole is an instructive example to those who are tempted to
think that Personalism in philosophy can furnish a good theistic foundation for
Christianity. It is a fact of history that all so-called personalistic philosophers have denied
13
 p. 292.
14
 Op. cit. p. 23.
15
 Op. cit., p. 85.
the orthodox interpretation of Christianity. We have shown why this fact of history is a
logical development of an inherent tendency of thought.
Chapter 8:
Historical Survey:
E. Modern Epistemology: Calvinism
We have seen in the preceding chapters that Protestant epistemology is more truly
Christian than Roman Catholic epistemology because it has taken seriously the noetic
influence of sin. We have also seen that Lutheran and Arminian epistemology have not
been as faithful to the Protestant principle as they might have been. We must now see that
the Protestant principle has come to its fullest expression in Calvinism and that Calvinism
is therefore more truly Christian than either Lutheranism or Arminianism.
In the second place, we have seen that Protestantism was more truly theistic than
Roman Catholicism because Protestantism does not ascribe as much false independence
to man as Romanism does. It remains now to observe that Calvinism has been more truly
theistic than either Lutheranism or Arminianism because it, better than they, has rid itself
of the last vestiges of human independence or autonomy.
One of the reasons why Protestantism was more truly Christian than Romanism is
that Protestantism has placed Scripture at the center of its thinking. Now it is in this
respect first of all that Calvinism is more Protestant than its sister branches of the
Protestant faith. We have noted above that Gobel, Nitzsche and Heppe consider it to be
the most important distinguishing feature between Calvinism and Lutheranism that the
former emphasized the formal principle of the authority of Scripture, while the latter has
emphasized the material principle of justification by faith. This may be too much of an
emphasis upon this point of difference, but that the difference exists is plain. It appears
perhaps as clearly as anywhere in the fact that the church-government policies of the
Calvinistic churches are the only ones that are scrupulously patterned after Scripture. It is
only if the “formal” and the “material” principles of Protestantism are taken as
supplementative to one another that the Protestant view of Scripture is really seen for
what it is. It is only thus that the whole teleology of history as seen by Protestantism is
clearly seen to be the opposite of the teleology of history as involved in Platonic-
Aristotelian thinking, as this thinking has largely controlled Roman Catholicism.
In the second place, we must note that Calvinism is more truly Christian than
Lutheranism because of the emphasis given to the work of the Holy Spirit in the
restoration of man to the true knowledge of God. Calvin has been called “the theologian
of the Holy Spirit.” Calvin more than anyone before him developed the doctrine of the
work of the Holy Spirit as indispensable for a true view of man and his world.
The emphasis placed by Calvin upon Scripture and upon the Holy Spirit must be
brought in connection with his conception of the noetic influences of sin. And his
teaching on this subject cannot be understood unless we have a clear grasp of his
conception of the image of God in man. Calvin distinguished between God’s image in the
narrower and God’s image in the wider sense. In the narrower sense, God’s image in man
is the true knowledge, the true righteousness and the true holiness that man possessed
when created by God. In the wider sense, God’s image in man is man’s rationality and
morality. Through sin man lost the image of God in the narrower sense altogether, and
retained only vestiges of God’s image in the wider sense. This means that man is
spiritually blind but remains a rational nature, and as such is always confronted by the
revelation of God about him and within his constitution. God does not deal with man as
with a block in the way that Luther thought of it. We must think of man as spiritually
blind without denying his personality. His spiritual blindness presupposes his being a
covenantal personality. Accordingly, there was no occasion for the development of
synergism in Calvinistic thought. There was no danger that man should be given any
absolute originality in the field of soteriology. The “natural man” has in his idea changed
God into something other than he is, and man cannot, unless the scales be removed from
his eyes, know anything truly about God or about anything else. Similarly, Scripture is
indispensable for the sinner in order to give to man spectacles through which he can truly
see God in the facts round about him or in his own constitution. Even in paradise the
revelation of God in nature round about and in nature within man had to be supplemented
by God’s direct thought communication to him. But for the sinner, this “super-natural”
thought communication must be redemptive.
In addition to the fact that Calvin retains absolute originality for God, we must note
that the character of salvation itself is conceived of as in no sense an eternization of man,
but as a restoration and development of this original perfection. The work of Christ did
not remove anything of the finitude of man; it removed the sin of man. The incarnation
was necessary not inasmuch as there is some measure of imperfection inherent in finite
creatures, because they are finite, but because man who was perfect and did not need a
Savior became a sinner, and for that reason did need a Savior. Hence, Christ’s human
nature need not be present in the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper. It will be observed that
in this respect Calvin differs widely from Lutheranism as outlined by Krauth, who
claimed that the incarnation would fall to the ground unless Christ is present in the
sacrament of the Supper, according to his human nature.
The position of Calvin on the matter of revelation also made it possible to do away
with the false scholastic distinction between natural and revealed theology. There is no
separate natural theology that can do without revelation and acquire true knowledge of
God up to a certain extent as the Scholastics taught. Nature can be read aright only by
those who allow the light of Scripture to fall upon it.
From the enumeration of these emphases of Calvin, it will become apparent that it is
upon the development of these teachings of Calvin that we must depend for a consistent
Christian epistemology. Calvin did not mix the categories of the temporal and eternal. He
did not succumb to the temptation of giving man a false independence in the work of
salvation. Hence he alone of all the Reformers could rid himself of the last remnants of
Platonic reasoning.
This is still more apparent if we note in the second place that Calvin’s position was
not only more truly Christian, but also more truly theistic than Lutheranism.
Calvin’s theism may best be considered for our purposes under the two headings of
the covenant theology and the Trinity. These two are mutually dependent.
The covenant theology of Calvin might have been considered under the discussion of
Calvin’s Christianity. Calvin’s soteriology, as well as the other loci of his theology,
depends entirely upon his covenant conception. Yet we prefer to discuss Calvin’s
covenant theory here because Calvin’s covenant idea goes back to the very foundation of
his theism.
It may even be said that Calvin’s covenant idea is Theism come to its own. The
covenant idea is nothing but the expression of the representational principle consistently
applied to all reality. The foundation of the representational principle among men is the
fact that the Trinity exists in the form of a mutually exhaustive representation of the three
Persons that constitute it. The emphasis should be placed upon the idea of exhaustion.
This is important because it brings out the point of the complete equality as far as
ultimacy is concerned of the principle of unity and the principle of diversity. This mutual
exhaustion of the persons of the Trinity places one before the choice of interpreting
reality in exclusively temporal categories or in exclusively eternal categories. The
demand of the doctrine of the Trinity, when thus conceived, is that reality be interpreted
in exclusively eternal categories inasmuch as the source of diversity lies in the Trinity
itself and could never be found in a sense world beyond God. Hence the problem of the
one and the many, of the universal and the particular, of being and becoming, of
analytical and synthetic reasoning, of the a priori and the a posteriori must be solved by
an exclusive reference to the Trinity. The only alternative to this is to assume
responsibility for trying to explain the whole of reality in temporal terms, and therefore
with man as the ultimate point of reference. Thus man is placed before a clear alternative
and there is no longer a temptation to attempt a solution of these problems by seeking
intermixtures of the temporal and the eternal.
It was upon this foundation of a truly trinitarian concept that Calvin built his
conception of covenant theology. If the Persons of the Trinity are representationally
exhaustive of one another, human thought is cast on representational lines too. There
would in that case be no other than a completely personalistic atmosphere in which
human personality could function. Accordingly, when man faced any fact whatsoever, he
would ipso facto be face to face with God. It is metaphysically as well as religiously true
that man must live and cannot but live coram deo always. Even the meeting of one finite
personality with another finite personality would not be truly personal if there were an
impersonal atmosphere surrounding either or both of these personalities. What makes
their meeting completely personal is the fact that the personality of each and of both is
surrounded by the personality of God. Hence all personal relationship between finite
persons must be mediated through the central personality of God. Hence also every
personal relationship among men must be representational of God. Every act of a finite
person must in the nature of the case be representational because the only alternative to
this is that it should be completely impersonal We may even say that every act of the
infinite personality of God must be representational because the only alternative to it
would be that it should be impersonal. The Trinity exists necessarily in the manner that it
does. We have seen this to be so because the principles of unity and diversity must be
equally original. Accordingly, when we come to the question of the nature of finite
personality it is not a handicap to finite personality to think of itself as related in some
way to the personality of God. On the contrary, the triune God of Scripture, the internally
complete personality of God, is the very condition of its existence. A finite personality
could function in none other than a completely personalistic atmosphere, and such an
atmosphere can be supplied to him only if his existence depends entirely upon the
exhaustive personality of God.
It is not as though we can first think out such a representational system of reality and
then happily find that it accords with what Scripture teaches. On the contrary, we learn
the trinitarian view as described from the Scripture, and accept it on the authority of
Christ speaking in Scripture. But this being the case, we at the same time realize that it is
this biblical position alone that offers an intelligent foundation for the exercise of all of
man’s functions.
It is in this manner that Calvin conceives of the personality of man. Man is not a
metaphysically independent being. Creation is taken seriously. Man does not need for his
responsibility a freedom that would enable him to do something beyond the plan of God.
And it is not a handicap in spite of which man must make the most of things, this fact that
he is within God’s universe and operates within God’s plan. Calvin is very sure that
unless man were operating within God’s plan, man would not be operating at all. It is not
with apologies that Calvin proposes his doctrine of the will of man, but he sets it forth
boldly as the only alternative to complete impersonalism. Calvin was keenly conscious of
the fact that covenant theology furnishes the only completely personalistic interpretation
of reality. The false striving of Lutheranism and of Arminianism for a personal act that
should be unipersonal in the sense of not being surrounded by a completely personalistic
atmosphere, Calvin is convinced, would lead, if carried out consistently, to the rejection
of the whole Christian theistic scheme of thought. He does not discuss the matter in the
exact form in which we discuss it here. His interest was not directly epistemological, but
rather religious. And this only shows the more clearly the great significance Calvin
attached to the matter of believing and practising a truly representational conception of
reality. He was deeply convinced that true religion could thrive upon the basis of a
covenant theology alone. Only covenant theology gives all the glory to God, and without
giving all the glory to God there is no true religion. Only a truly representational theology
will leave all the mysteries of existence, not the least of which is the mystery of evil, to
God for their solution.
For proof of the contentions brought forward in the preceding paragraphs, we would
briefly refer to Calvin’s discussion on (a) the knowledge of God, (b) the doctrine of God,
and (c) the doctrine of the Trinity. Dr. Warfield takes up each of these discussions in
great detail in his book Calvin and Calvinism (Collected Works).
Calvin is insistent that man cannot exist and never has existed apart from a sense of
deity. This is his way of saying that man’s knowledge of himself and of God comes
simultaneously. Warfield says, “If the knowledge of God enters thus into the very idea of
humanity and constitutes a law of its being, it follows that it is given in the same act of
knowledge by which we know ourselves.” 1 Man’s existence is never for a moment
thought of as apart from the existence of God. The triune God of Scripture is made the
presupposition of every human thought. The question whether man knows himself before
he knows God is not of importance if only temporal priority is considered. It is the
question of ultimate presupposition that is important. Moreover, Calvin was not
interested in reasoning about the mere existence of God apart from his nature. Calvin did
not separate the what from the that. Says Warfield, “The knowledge of God with which
we are natively endowed is therefore more than a bare conviction that God is: it involves,
more or less explicated, some understanding of what God is.” 2 There is no abstraction
anywhere in Calvin’s reasoning about the knowledge of God. There is no artificial
1
 p. 35.
2
 Op. cit., p. 37.
separation in his thought between natural and revealed theology, between the work of the
Spirit and the place of Scripture, between the knowledge of man and the knowledge of
God. All these matters are thought of in conjunction with one another when the sinner’s
knowledge of God is in question. And, because they are thought of in conjunction with
one another, the true priority can be placed where it ought to be placed, namely, in the
triune personality of God.
Calvin did not consider these proofs in detail. He did not altogether reject them. But
the fact that he places all possible emphasis on the fact that man can know nothing unless
he knows what he knows on the presupposition of the existence and revelation of the
triune God of the Bible, is calculated to destroy the proofs as historically formulated.
Calvin’s thought was concrete in the true sense of the word. He did not think that he
could know himself first and afterward know God. We have quoted Warfield in order to
fortify our interpretation of Calvin in which we brought out that the knowledge of self
and the knowledge of God is, according to Calvin, included in one act of thought. It is
this that makes Calvin’s reasoning truly analogical. It is thus that though Calvin has not
discussed the theistic arguments in detail, he has really done a great service in their
behalf. He has distinguished by implication if not by expression between a truly theistic
and an essentially antitheistic use of these arguments. In this way a definite advance is
made in the direction of a consistently Christian theistic epistemology and a consistently
theistic apologetics.
In distinction from Calvin’s doctrine of the knowledge of God, we must now briefly
look at his doctrine of God as a whole, in order to prove still further our contention that
Calvin has really made an advance in the direction of a truly Christian theistic
epistemology. On this matter we can be brief. All that it concerns us to note in this
connection is that Calvin has in turn been charged with being pantheistic and with being
deistic in his conception of God. More clearly than anyone before him, Calvin worked
out the concepts of the transcendence and the immanence of God. In this way, Calvin has
really developed the concept of Theism better than anyone before him. (A. M. Fairbairn
is quoted by Warfield as saying, “Calvin was as pure, though not as conscious and
consistent a Pantheist as Spinoza.”) 3 The reason given for such an astounding statement
is that Calvin has maintained that God is really the only efficient will in the universe. But
this is a simple misstatement of Calvin’s teaching inasmuch as Calvin only taught that all
things happen according to God’s plan. To argue from this that God’s will is the only
efficient will in the universe is possible only if one takes for granted that an act to be
personal must be unipersonal; i.e., in this case, that an act cannot take place according to
the plan of God and at the same time be done by an act of man. The truth of the matter is
that Spinoza perhaps more than anyone else has emphasized the identity of the universe
and God, while Calvin better than anyone before him has kept the universe and God
apart. For Calvin, God’s transcendence is prior to his immanence. This is but the natural
consequence of his teaching that God’s existence is self-complete prior to the existence
of the universe. It is for this reason that Calvin has been kept from teaching an
immanence doctrine that virtually amounts to an identity doctrine. The very fact that
Calvin has been characterized as a deist and as a pantheist is indicative of the fact that he
took God’s transcendence and immanence equally seriously. His was a true theism. In
3
 Op. cit., p. 156.
this way Calvin was able to avoid the first method of Platonic reasoning altogether
inasmuch as he attributed no false independence to the sense world. Reality would have
to be interpreted in eternal categories.
Calvin’s theism was not a “mixture” of pantheism, understood as abstract identity of
God and the universe, and of deism, understood as abstract separation of God and the
world. The mixture of two heresies does not produce truth. Calvin’s theism exists in his
beginning with the triune God of Scripture as the presupposition of all true human
predication.
Then further, we may observe that Calvin’s teaching includes a truly theistic
conception of the revelation of God’s nature to God’s will. In this connection it is of
importance to note again that Fairbairn has so emphasized Calvin’s teaching of the nature
of God as practically to identify it with impersonal will, while the common objection to
Calvinism has been that it holds to an arbitrary God. Fact is, that for Calvin, God’s will is
never arbitrary because it is expressive of God’s nature, while God’s nature is never to be
identified with impersonal law because God’s nature is never taken in separation from
God’s will. It is thus that complete personalism and thereafter complete stability are
combined. It is thus too that the difficulties Plato faced when he tried his second method
of reasoning are overcome. Plato, it will be recalled, tried in his second method of
reasoning to interpret all reality in terms of the Ideal world, but failed to do so because he
found no harmony in the Ideal world. In the Ideal world there was a difference between
the impersonal principles or Ideas and the personal God. Augustine, we have seen, taught
that the Ideas are together the plan of God. It was in this way that Augustine found unity
in the Ideal world. It was in this way too that Calvin, further explicating the ideas of
Augustine, found unity between the will and the nature of God. It was in this way too that
Calvin was really able to interpret reality in exclusively eternal categories. Plato was
unable to do this because he did not have unity in the Ideal world. Thus it may be said
that in the further elaboration that Calvin gave to the Augustinian idea of God, there was
an advance in the direction of a truly Christian theistic epistemology.
Finally, we must pause to look more particularly at Calvin’s doctrine of the Trinity.
We have already said something about his trinitarian concept’s furnishing the foundation
of his concept of his theology of the covenant. We have also discussed Calvin’s doctrine
of God in general, of which his doctrine of the Trinity is naturally the expression. Yet it
will repay us to look more particularly at Calvin’s doctrine of the Trinity because it has a
particular bearing upon the question of epistemology.
In his article, Calvin’s Doctrine of the Trinity, which appears in the volume referred
to, Dr. Warfield makes abundantly clear that Calvin has made a definite contribution to
the Christian doctrine of the Trinity. The contribution made consisted in bringing forcibly
to the foreground the concept of the consubstantiality of the persons of the Trinity. The
Nicene doctrine, to be sure, spoke of the consubstantiality of the persons, but in the
thought of the church this had not borne the fruit that it should have borne. Warfield
speaks of the contribution made by Calvin in the following words: “That contribution is
summed up in his clear, firm and unwavering assertion of the autotheotys of the Son. But
his assertion of the autotheotys of the Nicene Fathers came to its full right, and became in
its fullest sense the hinge of the doctrine.” 4 At an earlier point Warfield tells us that the
4
 Op. cit., p. 184.
reason for the church’s failure to live up to the full implication of its Nicene teaching on
the subject of the Trinity was “that Nicene orthodoxy preserved in its modes of stating
the doctrine of the Trinity some remnants of the conceptions and the phraseology proper
to the prolationism of the Logos Christology, and these, although rendered innocuous by
the explanations of the Nicene Fathers and practically antiquated since the time of
Augustine, still held their place formally and more or less conditioned the thought of
men—especially those who held the doctrine of the Trinity in a more or less traditional
manner.” 5 In the thought of the church, the doctrine of the eternal generation of the Son
and the procession of the Spirit had been taken to mean some subordination of essence
instead of subordination of personality. Hence Calvin did not hesitate to improve upon
the Nicene terminology and added the word “autotheotys” in order to emphasize the fact
that the Son as much as the Father is underivative.
Romanists, Lutherans, and Arminians have in turn attacked Calvin’s insistence on the
aseity of the Son. 6 The reason for this was that in all three of these groups of thinkers
there were remnants of subordinationism. Thus the fact that Lutheranism and
Arminianism attacked the strict coordinationism of Calvin is anew a justification of the
interpretation we have given when we made the charge that the Lutheran and the
Arminian positions failed to keep the temporal and the eternal apart, and to make the
triune God of Scripture primary in their thinking.
The epistemological importance of this question becomes at once apparent if we
recall that it was exactly a clear insistence on the distinction between the temporal and
the eternal that was most needed if we were to have a consistent Christian theistic
epistemology. The very foundation of a true epistemology is the complete self-
consciousness of God. Now such a complete self-consciousness cannot be effected if
there is any remnant of subordinationism in the persons of the Trinity. If there is any
subordinationism it implies that God is to that extent no longer the sole interpretative
category of all reality. The measure of subordinationism that any system of theology
retains in its doctrine of the Trinity is indicative of the measure of paganism in such a
theology. Plato’s independent sense world looms upon the horizon the moment
subordinationism is given any place. At last then a definite move was made in the right
direction when the church was called upon to rid itself of the last remnants of
subordinationism.
We have seen that Calvin really worked out the Reformation principle much more
consistently than either Lutheranism or Arminianism. Calvin restored fully the biblical
conception of the sinner, and therefore restored fully the biblical doctrine of man. In the
second place Calvin restored the full significance of the biblical doctrine of the Trinity
and therewith the biblical conception of the complete self-consciousness of God. Thus on
the most pivotal points of epistemology we find that Calvin has led the course of
Christian theistic thought back into true channels. It will be on the lines of thought
suggested by Calvin that further developments of Christian epistemology may be
expected.
5
 Op. cit., p. 233.
6
 cf. Warfield, op. cit., p. 262 f.
Chapter 9:
Historical Survey:
F. Modern Epistemology: Antitheistic
We have seen that it is really in modern times that the question of epistemology
proper has come to the foreground. The ancients busied themselves more with
metaphysics than with epistemology. And that it is in modern times that epistemology
comes to the foreground is due to the fact that modern thought is more mature than
ancient thought. The ancients all too often took knowledge for granted. The modern man
studies the possibility of knowledge. It is but natural then that we should expect that it
will be in modern times that the full significance of the life and death struggle between
the theistic and the antitheistic conceptions of epistemology will appear. We have already
seen that it was in the Reformation theology that the theistic motif has been worked out
more fully than ever before. Accordingly we must now take a glance at the high spots of
modern antitheistic epistemology. We would consider it only insofar as it has a direct
bearing upon the relation of the consciousness of man to the consciousness of God.
Descartes, it is well known, attempts to find the rock bottom of certainty for
knowledge by proving that it is impossible to doubt the existence of the thought activity
of human personality. He thinks he has struck bottom when he says that it would even be
impossible for God to deceive him unless he existed. It is thus, from what Descartes
thinks to be the immovable foundation of the existence of the human personality, that he
builds up his arguments for the existence of the universe around him and for the existence
of God.
The important thing to note about this position of Descartes is not that which is
usually made so much of, namely, that Descartes has emphatically stressed in distinction
from the ancients the independence of man from the universe around him. The important
thing is rather that Descartes has emphasized man’s independence from God. It is not the
subjectivism of Descartes that worries us so much as his antitheism. Only insofar as his
subjectivism may be considered an evidence of antitheism need it claim our attention.
And we need not analyze that point because the antitheistic character of Descartes’
thought is so plain and so pointed and so direct that we need not take the time for more
indirect arguments.
We need only for a moment compare the reasoning of Descartes with the reasoning of
Calvin in order to note the complete contrast between them. Calvin thought it impossible
so much as for an instant to think of the personality of man without thinking of the
personality of God. Descartes, on the other hand, makes it the very foundation of his
philosophy to think of man first of all and in total independence of his creator. If any
should doubt this interpretation, we have only to point to the fact that the whole
philosophy of Kant was directed against the very point that Descartes’ philosophy was a
philosophy of separation. Kant had no use for the theistic arguments as they were based
upon Cartesian philosophy because they presupposed the separate existence of man and
the universe. It is not too much to say then that Descartes makes man the starting point of
his philosophy while Calvin makes God the starting point of his philosophy.
Further corroboration of the correctness of this interpretation lies in the fact that
according to Descartes the physical universe operates according to completely
mechanistic principles. The point here is not first of all that Descartes has not only denied
the creation of the physical universe by God, but that he has denied the providence of
God. For purposes of epistemological argument it makes no difference whether a man
denies creation and providence or whether he denies providence only. Whether one
denies creation alone or providence alone, or whether one denies both makes no
difference, because in any event one has thought of facts as at some time or somewhere
in independence of God, and that makes such a denial thoroughly antitheistic. It is this
point that makes the whole deistic movement that was based upon the philosophy of
Descartes so thoroughly antitheistic.
Taking these two points, Descartes’ doctrine of man and his doctrine of the physical
universe, we can observe that according to Descartes law existed independently of the
personality of God. It is sometimes said that the famous dictum of Descartes, Cogito ergo
sum must not be thought of as a syllogism with the major premise “whatever thinks
exists.” We must rather think of man’s present consciousness as the starting point from
which he draws the general conclusion that whatever thinks exists. Now we are not
concerned with the correctness of this interpretation. Whichever way we may interpret
Descartes, he is thoroughly antitheistic. To conceive of the individual human
consciousness as the ultimate starting point on which conclusions are to be based with
respect to universal laws, makes man instead of God the source of law. On the other
hand, to start with a general law such as “whatever thinks exists,” without asking whether
such a law exists by itself or is dependent upon God for its existence, does not give that
originality to God without which no true theism can exist.
The two lines of thought developed after Descartes are Empiricism and Rationalism.
Both may be said to be developments of an aspect of Descartes’ position.
Empiricism took its stand deliberately in the ultimacy of the sense world. Thus we
can compare Empiricism with the first method of Platonic reasoning. It is not as though
the Ideal world is wholly forgotten. The Ideal world is still thought of as existing, but as
existing in such separation from the sense world that it is possible for man to start
operating from the sense world as an independent entity in order to discover truth. In
theology it became customary to think of God as the creator of the universe but to deny
him as being the sustainer of the universe up to the very present. The pendulum swing
was toward deism.
The fact that Empiricism thought of the universe as independent of God appears still
more clearly in the nominalism of Berkeley and Hume. For them the universals are
entirely subjective, i.e. hey have nothing to do with objects beyond the human mind. Now
the antitheistic character of this position appears clearly if we observe that his
nominalism is directly opposed to the idea of the plan of God. If a consistent theism is to
be maintained there is no fact anywhere that does not carry within it the “universal” of
the plan of God. According to theism the relation of the human mind to the objects of the
physical universe is mediated through the plan of God. It is then impossible to let the
whole truth or falsity of the knowledge of facts beyond the human mind depend upon the
so-called subjectivity or objectivity of the universals. To say that knowledge of objective
facts is uncertain or untrustworthy because the human mind contributes the categories of
thought is to deny, even if it be only indirectly, the plan of God according to which all
facts are related.
We can well understand then that the nominalism of Berkeley developed into the
scepticism of Hume. Hume says that the empiricistic position furnishes no a priori or
valid element for thought. Hume tried to work out the full implication of Descartes’
emphasis upon the human mind as the most ultimate foundation for knowledge. He
concluded that upon such a basis no knowledge is possible. We cannot help but agree
with his conclusions, though not with his premise. The scepticism of Hume is the best
reduction to absurdity of the position that takes its start from the human individual. We
shall find that later forms of Empiricism have added to the subtlety of the general point of
view but that none have added any strength to the position. Hume’s thought remains as
the simplest proof that if one takes his stand upon the sense world as such there is no
knowledge possible of anything. Hume’s position works out Plato’s first method to the
point of obvious absurdity.
Rationalism may be said to have developed the idea of Descartes that reasoning may
be conducted according to certain universal principles that hover somewhere in the
universe and must be taken for granted as ultimate. Rationalism may be compared to the
second method of Platonic reasoning. In his second method of reasoning Plato tried to
interpret all reality in terms of certain a priori principles. But Rationalism could not
escape the necessity of taking a position on the question of the relation of these general
principles to the Idea or principle of personality. Eventually one must hold that principles
rest in God as ultimate and self-sufficient personality, or one must hold that these
principles rest in human personality as ultimate. We have already seen that Plato’s failure
to face this question resulted in the unhappy consequence that he found no unity in the
Ideal world. And this failure to find unity in the Ideal world resulted once more in his
inability to interpret the sense world in terms of the Ideal world as he was anxious to do.
Similarly, Rationalism as the heir of the Platonic tradition took for granted that these a
priori principles rested in the human mind as an ultimate. True, they also spoke of God as
Plato before them had spoken of God. But the determining point is that in neither case did
God receive the place of originality that he needs if he is to be thought of in a truly
theistic sense.
It is no wonder then that, as in the case of Hume, the Cartesian principles of the
independence of the sense world ran into a blind alley, so in the case of Spinoza the
Cartesian principles of reasoning from abstract principles ran aground. As Hume’s
scepticism was a hasty but simple reduction to absurdity of Empiricism, so Spinoza’s
pantheism is a hasty and simple reduction to absurdity of Rationalism. Spinoza argued
out the concept of substance and found that God and man are but individuations of the
general Idea of substance. Thus the abstract principle of rationality was thought of as
standing above both God and man.
With respect to both Hume and Spinoza it should be remarked that their reasoning
was univocal instead of analogical. In the case of Spinoza this is plain. He simply
analyzed the idea of a substance, taking it for granted that the term, if applicable at all,
must be applicable in the same way to both God and man. In the case of Hume the
univocal character of his reasoning is not so plain. Yet he too takes it for granted that if
the human mind cannot produce the universals that are required for knowledge, neither
can God. Hume draws a negative conclusion and Spinoza draws a positive conclusion
with respect to the existence of God. But from the theistic point of view the one has
exactly as much value as the other. Spinoza’s conclusion is in reality as negative as
Hume’s if we ask whether there be a truly absolute God. One who says that all is God
may as well say that nothing is God. Univocal reasoning must always lead to negation.
Univocal reasoning is based upon negation. The very presupposition of univocal
reasoning is that there is no absolute God. If there were an absolute God it is ipso facto
out of the question to apply the categories of thought to him in the same way that they are
applied to man.
We can perhaps best express the crux of what Kant tried to contribute to the process
of antitheistic thought by saying that he represents the third and last method of Platonic
reasoning. Plato’s last method of reasoning was the result of an attempt to combine his
first and second methods of reasoning. Similarly, Empiricism tried to interpret reality in
terms of the sense world alone, and Rationalism tried to interpret reality in terms of the
world of Ideas alone, while Kant attempted to effect a combination of the two. The form
of the problem in this connection is no doubt differently stated in modern times than it
was in ancient times, but it is only fair to say that the problem itself remains essentially
the same. The only questions of fundamental import that can be asked in epistemology
are whether reality is to be interpreted in exclusively temporal categories or in
exclusively eternal categories, or in a mixture of the two. These two, we have already had
occasion to observe, eventually reduce themselves to two possibilities, namely, whether
reality is to be interpreted in eternal or in temporal categories.
If then we are justified in saying that the philosophy of Kant is an attempt to interpret
reality in a mixture of eternal and temporal categories, this very fact is indicative of an
antitheistic position. No theist can say that reality can be interpreted in an ultimate way
except in eternal categories. We saw before that the very fact that the Scholastics tried to
solve the “antinomies” of thought between time and eternity was indicative of a lack of a
true theistic consciousness. We saw also that the alternative before which
Schneckenberger put Calvinism of either accepting the Lutheran view of the intermixture
of the temporal and the eternal, or posit a dualism in the divinity itself, is indicative of an
insufficient theistic consciousness. Anyone even attempting to interpret reality in a
mixture of categories has said in effect that the principles of diversity and unity do not
find their ultimate union in God but in a combination of God and the universe. It is true
that he has said this to be a possibility only, but to say something to be a possibility is
saying a great deal. When one defines possibility he ipso facto defines reality. When one
opens his mouth about possibility he also opens his mouth about God. God is either the
source of possibility or he comes out of bare possibility, or for that matter any other term
would have no significance if God were not back of it as the final subject of predication.
It is this fundamental basis of theism that is denied if one attempts to interpret reality in a
mixture of categories.
That Kant does as a matter of fact try to interpret reality by a mixture of categories is
evident from that which forms the very heart of his position, namely, that the union of the
a posteriori and a priori elements of thought are found in the human mind. The specific
problem Kant put himself was whether synthetic judgments are a priori possible. By
synthetic judgments new knowledge is acquired. But Hume seemed to have shown that
synthetic judgments are impossible because to pass on to a new fact from an old one or
from a known fact to an unknown one requires a connection between these facts, and we
have no guarantee that there is such a connection. Our minds must furnish the connection,
and we have no reason to think that our minds can furnish such a connection. On the
other hand the rationalists thought they had the necessary connection between the facts
with which they were acquainted, but they could not add new facts to their store because
there was no guarantee that the new facts would partake of the character of the universal
laws. Now what Kant tried to do was to show that both Rationalism and Empiricism had
labored under the false delusion that the a priori and the a posteriori elements in
experience had been separated from one another. He said that in knowledge the human
mind, to be sure, furnishes the a priori element, but this does not invalidate knowledge.
On the contrary, the validation of knowledge lies in the very fact that the mind itself
contributes the cement that binds experience together. Man can have genuine scientific
knowledge about the world that surrounds him, says Kant, only because the mind itself
furnishes “objectivity.” The mind of man “creates” objectivity. The former object and the
former subject of Rationalism and Empiricism are to be taken into the new subject. Thus
we have a transcendental deduction of the categories. By a transcendental deduction of
the categories Kant means that the facts of space and time and the relations of thought in
general are shown never to have been thought of as separate from one another.
This criticism of Kant on Empiricism and Rationalism was undoubtedly correct as far
as his contention that the mind of man and the facts of the universe should never have
been separated is concerned. But it is equally true that the more fundamental question
still is whether the mind of man should ever have been thought of in separation from the
mind of God. How can the human mind know anything about any of the facts of the
universe if these facts as well as the mind itself are not related upon the basis of a more
fundamental unity in the plan of God? Yet it is exactly Kant’s contention that the human
mind does have a sphere of knowledge of its own apart from its relation to God and apart
from the relation of the facts to God. And this position would not be tenable unless the
mind of man were independent of the divine mind in some essential respect. In reality it
matters not whether one says that man knows one fact or a thousand facts or all facts
apart from God. In all cases he is equally antitheistic. Even to say that one fact is
knowable to man directly apart from the relation of both fact and mind to the plan of God
is in effect to deny that God is absolutely self-conscious. It is in effect to deny that reality
must ultimately and exclusively be interpreted in eternal categories. Even to say that one
fact can be known by man apart from God is to deny the representational character of
human thought. It would be to claim originality for human thought. As such it would be a
denial of the creation of man by God.
It should be observed then that the statement often made that Kant limited the field of
knowledge in order to make room for faith is fundamentally mistaken. If Kant’s position
were to be retained, both knowledge and faith would be destroyed.
Knowledge and faith are not contradictories but complementaries. Kant did not make
room for faith, because he destroyed the God on whom alone faith is to be fixed. It is true
of course, that Kant spoke of a God as possibly existing. This God, however, could not be
more than a finite God, since he at least did not have, or did not need to have, original
knowledge of the phenomenal world. Kant thought that man could get along without God
in the matter of scientific knowledge. It is thus that the representational principle which
we saw to be the heart of the Christian theistic theory of knowledge is set aside. If man
knows certain facts whether or not God knows these facts, as would be the case if the
Kantian position were true, man’s knowledge would be done away with. Whatever sort of
God may remain, on Kant’s view, he is not the supreme interpretative category of human
experience.
That the Kantian epistemology is the very reverse of Christian theistic epistemology
may also be seen from the manner in which Kant has destroyed the validity of the theistic
arguments by showing that they cannot bring us beyond the finite realm. This is not a
satisfactory way of putting the matter. Kant did, to be sure, destroy the force of the
theistic arguments as they had often been employed and are still employed by Christian
teachers. Many Christian teachers have employed and still employ the theistic arguments
univocally. That is, they reason in direct linear fashion from cause to effect or from effect
to cause and reason simply that since every effect must have a cause the universe must
have a cause or creator. Now if the arguments are used in this fashion it is true that Kant
has destroyed them. It is always possible to ask for the cause of the cause till one faints in
an infinite regression. When we say in this naive fashion that God made the world, the
little girl will ask us, and ask us justly, who made God.
But when Kant destroyed the univocal use of the arguments he did not destroy the
analogical use of them. The true analogical method of reasoning in general is based upon
the proposition that human knowledge of anything presupposes God is ultimate self-
consciousness as the point of reference for man’s knowledge of anything. As Kant
maintained that all of the troubles of Empiricism and Rationalism were due to a false
separation of the subject and the object of knowledge, so we would maintain that all of
the antinomies of antitheistic reasoning are due to a false separation of man from God. If
it were not for sin man would never have thought of his knowledge as otherwise than as
representative of the knowledge that God has of himself and of man and his world. And
as Kant felt assured of the justice of his position because of the fact that no knowledge
was actually possible upon either rationalistic or empiricistic basis, we feel assured of the
justice of our position because no knowledge is actually obtained upon the Kantian basis.
That Kant has no knowledge of facts is clear from the consideration that he has no
exhaustive knowledge of his facts. He claimed to have knowledge of the phenomenal
world, and theologians have usually been satisfied to let him have that much as long as
they were given a free field in the noumenal realm. This was a mistake. We cannot allow
that on his principles Kant can have true knowledge even of the phenomenal world. He
could not be sure that some fact of the noumenal world, say God, might not influence the
facts that he thought he knew in the phenomenal world. Moreover, he was bound to make
negative statements about the noumenal world. Take for a moment the phenomenon of
Jesus walking on earth. If the orthodox Christian view is correct there was in Jesus a
combination of the phenomenal and the noumenal. Yet Kant would have to maintain that
Jesus was exclusively phenomenal. Thus he would be denying the contact of the
noumenal with the phenomenal. Now Jesus said that those who denied the noumenal in
him will one day be condemned to eternal punishment by him. Kant would have to deny
that such a thing could ever happen. Yet he said there might be a noumenal world. To be
consistent he would therefore have to deny the existence of the noumenal world or he
would have to give up his insistence that we can be sure that we have true knowledge of
the phenomenal world without reference to the noumenal world.
It is now that we begin to understand that Kant has destroyed the univocal use of the
theistic arguments by a univocal argument. He has cast out demons by Beelzebub. But
Beelzebub is himself a creature under the power of God. That is, for Kant’s negations
with respect to the theistic arguments to have any meaning, the God of Christianity, the
God of whom Kant virtually says that he cannot exist, actually does exist. We have seen
that to keep up his opposition he would have to maintain the non-existence of the
absolute altogether. Kant would have to maintain the self-sufficiency of the phenomenal
world. Now it is exactly this that Kant really did when he said that it is possible for man
to have knowledge apart from God. His creativity theory of thought demanded such a
declaration of independence. But the phenomenal world could not be absolute according
to Kant himself because the time element was an inherent ingredient of its constitution.
Kant spoke repeatedly of synthetic judgments, i.e., judgments in which new knowledge
was added to an already existing system of knowledge. And if it be said that by this he
perhaps meant no more than that the knowledge was new for us and not for God, we can
reply that knowledge for us is all that Kant considered of importance. He thought that
there could be knowledge for us whether or not there was knowledge for God. Thus new
knowledge for us, since it could take place in independence of God, would also be new
knowledge for God if God knew about it at all. And if it be objected once more that at
least the reality about which new knowledge was acquired might not be new, but only the
knowledge of it, we reply again that according to Kant the reality that is not in contact
with our knowledge is just as good as non-existent. Time itself is subjective. What is new
to us is new to God if he knows of it, and it is new in every intelligible sense according to
Kant. And if it is new altogether, it cannot be said that one has knowledge of any fact that
has preceded this new knowledge. Every old fact will be changed or at least may be
changed by this new fact that has floated into our ken. The formulas of mathematics may
have to be modified if a new planet is discovered. What I now think to be good moral
conduct may be proved to be immoral if the new fact of the judgment should come. On a
Kantian basis it is impossible for the a priori element of thought to catch up with the a
posteriori element of thought. And the reason for this is that the a priori element must be
furnished by the mind of man which is itself a temporally conditioned being, whether one
conceives of time as subjective or as objective.
If now we gather up the elements of our contention we may see that (a) for Kant’s
rejection of the theistic arguments to have any significance they must really be valid for
all possible existence and thus be inclusive of the future as well as of the past. In other
words Kant needs an absolute in order to make his arguments against the “absolute,”
called God, effective. Yet (b) in the universe and in the mind of man no such absolute can
be found, for the sufficient reason that the synthetic always outruns the analytic if the
human mind is to furnish the interpretative category of experience. Accordingly, (c) it is
fair to say that Kant has to presuppose the existence of the triune God of Scripture before
he can disprove it.
It is thus that Kant has slain univocal arguments for the existence of God by a
univocal argument against such arguments, and has at the same time killed all univocal
reasoning by showing that all univocal reasoning, including his own, presupposes
analogical reasoning. As Samson died when he slew his enemies, so Kant died when he
slew his.
The service rendered by Kant to the whole epistemological struggle can scarcely be
overestimated. That service may in general be summed up by saying that he has greatly
clarified the issue between theistic and antitheistic thinking. Kant taught many a theist to
reason analogically as the inherent principles of his position demanded. We have seen
that Calvin reasoned analogically in fact. But Calvin was not first of all a philosopher,
and did not work out this method of analogical reasoning in epistemological terminology.
Those that came after Kant, however, and would follow out the analogical reasoning as
engaged in in principle by Augustine and by Calvin, have the benefit of the greater
clearness in the atmosphere that resulted from the Kantian criticism of the theistic
arguments. There is no excuse for them if they reason univocally instead of analogically.
Kant has done a great service for the theistic arguments by destroying them as they were
traditionally used and by bringing out the necessity of using them in their true form.
On the other hand, the greatness of Kant’s service in the field of epistemology
appears from the fact that Kant has more than anyone before him emphasized the fact that
antitheistic reasoning is insistent upon univocal reasoning as the only type of reasoning
possible. Kant has made it forever impossible for antitheistic thought to return to any
method of Platonic reasoning. Kant has placed the a priori and the a posteriori so
thoroughly in the human mind as ultimate, that he will no longer think of the Ideal world
and the sense world in separation from one another. Plato’s first method was based upon
the idea that the sense world existed apart from the Ideal world, but it was all the while
remembered that the Ideal world existed too. Plato’s second method was based upon the
idea of the independent existence of the Ideal world, but it was all the while remembered
that the sense world existed too. Plato’s third method tried to combine the two worlds,
but it was all the while remembered that they had been or were still existing in
independence of one another to some extent. Now with Kant all this is changed. The two
worlds are never more to be thought of in separation from one another. There will come
after Kant those who think that all reality can be interpreted in the categories of the sense
world. But these will make no more reference to the ideal world at all. There will be
those who try once more to interpret all reality in terms of the Ideal world. But these will
first try to prove the total non-existence of the sense world. Finally, there will be those
who try to interpret reality in terms of both the Ideal and the sense world but they will
take for granted that these worlds have always existed in mutual dependence.
We may say then that Kant has reduced the three methods of reasoning to one. Kant
has found the original sin of all epistemology to be this separation in thought of the two
worlds of the a priori and the a posteriori, the two worlds of time and eternity: there is
only one form of reasoning possible for the antitheists. The only form of reasoning that
remains for them is to try to effect a mixture of the categories, and this is in reality a
victory for the temporal categories. We have seen that according to Kant the human mind
must furnish the only a priori element that experience is to receive. Or we might say that
God and man together must furnish the a priori element. At any rate man must furnish
something of the a priori element. And since man is a temporal being, the a priori that he
furnishes will be temporally conditioned and will really be no a priori element at all.
What Kant’s influence has really amounted to is this emphasis upon the exclusive use of
temporal categories.
It is but natural then that after Kant, Christian apologists should direct the brunt of
their attack upon this basic contention of antitheism that reality can be interpreted in
exclusively temporal categories. It is the creativity theory of thought as defended by Kant
that has laid it down as a law of Medes and Persians that all reasoning must be univocal
and therefore man-centered. It insists that we shall do away with the custom of
distinguishing between divine and human thought. We are to speak of thought as such.
Christian apologists should therefore note that if this program of Kant is to be carried out
the complete annihilation of all knowledge results, and that this in itself is the best proof
that univocal reasoning is false reasoning.
As to post-Kantian antitheistic epistemology, we may now be brief as far as our
historical survey is concerned. We may divide post-Kantian antitheistic epistemology
into two divisions. There have been those who have inconsistently and there have been
those who have consistently worked out the demands of Kant that all reality must be
interpreted in exclusively temporal categories. Or we may perhaps better express this idea
by saying that there has been a more and a less consistent application of the Kantian
principles. Both have good reason for claiming Kant as their father, because Kant was at
one time more and at another time less consistent in the application of his own principles.
Or rather, Kant was not consistent himself, and for that reason his followers have not
been consistent. And the reason why neither Kant nor his followers have been consistent
is that a really consistent application of the Kantian principles leads too easily to an
obvious reductio ad absurdum of the whole antitheistic position.
The modern pragmatic philosophers have more consistently than others tried to
eliminate the eternal in their interpretation of reality. They speak of “obsolescence of the
eternal.” For them the whole conception of knowledge and of truth has nothing to do with
the Ideal world. It may be said that in this respect they have followed the tradition of the
ancient Sophists and of the Empiricists of the modern day. Yet the difference is that the
pragmatist thinkers have much more thoroughly than their forebears learned to forget
about the eternal. They are no longer deists. They do not need God for the idea of
providence, but neither do they need him for the idea of creation. And for these reasons
the pragmatic thinkers do not need God for knowledge. They continue to speak of God,
but the God they speak of is a finite God. This God is himself constantly looking for new
facts. He may be said to be as scientific as man is scientific, in the sense that he uses
hypotheses and theories which he applies to reality that exists independent of him. Thus
pragmatism has consistently worked out the Kantian idea that man must furnish his own
a priori. F. C. S. Schiller has made this point particularly clear in his article, “Axioms as
Postulates” in the book Personal Idealism. He tells us that what are now considered to be
axioms by us, that is the universals of daily thought, were once no more than the
postulates of our forefathers. Thus mankind has historically developed his own a priori
and this is all he needs.
The modern Idealistic philosophers have less consistently worked out the Kantian
principle. To be sure, Hegel was in many respects more consistent than Kant. He saw and
enunciated clearly that if man can have knowledge of any one fact he must have
knowledge of all facts, inasmuch as all facts are interrelated. Of course Hegel did not
mean that any one human being or for that matter that all human beings together do know
all things or can know all things comprehensively. Yet it is in consonance with his most
fundamental contention that, in principle, mankind must be able to know all things to
know any one thing. He truly saw that if Kant was right in holding that man can have
knowledge of the phenomenal world with no reference to God, then man must also be
able to have knowledge of the noumenal world without God. He saw clearly that Kant’s
creativity theory of thought demanded a more consistent application than Kant himself
had given it. If human thought can legislate for the phenomenal sphere it must also be
able to legislate for the noumenal sphere. If anything, Hegel developed still more than
Kant the idea that the a priori and the a posteriori should never be separated, that the
Ideal and the sense worlds have always been together, that we should not distinguish
between divine and human thought, but speak of thought as such. His Coherence Notion
of Truth is a further elaboration of Kant’s creativity theory of truth. It implies the
complete correlativity between divine and human thought. One can just as well say that
God needs man for his knowledge as that man needs God for his knowledge.
In principle, then, Hegelian or Idealistic thought in general does not differ from
pragmatic thought. They are both elaborations of Kant’s creativity theory of thought
which has set up the temporal categories as the ultimate standard of all interpretation. The
only difference is that Hegel did, while the Pragmatists did not, refer to God or the Ideal
world. We shall have occasion to note that Idealistic philosophy is not entitled to this
reference to God. This reference is no more than an inconsistency.
It will be impossible to carry on this review of the history of epistemology into the
details of all the varieties of Realism and Pragmatism and Idealism that control the
philosophical field today. Our hasty sketch can do no more than touch on the high spots.
But it should be noted that this is really all that is necessary for the purposes of Christian
theistic apologetics. We are not seeking a detailed knowledge of epistemological theories.
We are rather interested to note the large comprehensive movements and the few
outstanding principles that have shaped the course of the antitheistic argument. But so
much as we have given may suffice to place before us the high-water mark of the thought
of the day and age in which we live and in which we are called to labor. Having traced
the historical development of the thought that faces us as Christians today, we are in a
position to do justice to that thought and at the same time be certain that we have met the
worst enemy that could lace us. We must engage in a life and death struggle with the
enemy as he appears today.
Chapter 10:
The Starting Point Of Christian Theistic
Epistemology:
A: The Object Of Knowledge
Having now come to the end of our brief historical review of the struggle between the
two main types of epistemological theory, it remains to gather up the results and attempt
to give a systematic statement of the present state of affairs and of what would seem to be
the best way of establishing the truth of our position against the modern form of
opposition to it.
The first matter that naturally comes up for consideration is once more the question of
a starting point. We have already made some preliminary remarks about that question in
the second chapter. Our chief interest there was to show that there is a bias involved in
the question of epistemology even at the very starting point. We must now set that fact in
relation to other questions that center about the general question of a starting point.
Our historical review has brought out the fact that the struggle between Christian
theism and its opponent covers the whole field of knowledge. It is not as though we are at
the outset dealing with the question of the knowledge of the world about us and that the
only point in dispute is whether or not God can be and need be known. We may indeed
make the question whether God need be and can be known so inclusive that it coincides
with the question whether anything cab be known. Christian theism’s fundamental
contention is just this, that nothing whatsoever can be known unless God can be and is
known. And as stated before, by God we mean the triune, self-sufficient God and his
revelation of himself to man and his world. In whatever way we put the question then, the
important thing to note is this fundamental difference between theism and antitheism on
the question of epistemology. There is not a spot in heaven or on earth about which there
is no dispute between the two opposing parties. It is this point that can bear much
emphasis again and again.
We may perhaps best bring out what seems to be of importance in this connection by
showing that both in what is commonly called the object of knowledge and in what is
commonly called the subject of knowledge there is a difference of opinion when the
question of starting point is under consideration.
By the object of knowledge we understand anything that is spoken of as a “fact.”
Such facts may be found in any of many realms of investigation. They may belong to the
physical world. They may belong to the world of psychology. They may belong to the
world of mathematics. They may belong to the world of the “spiritual.”
It will be observed at once, however, that about some of these facts the question that
must at once be raised is whether they exist, i.e., whether they are really facts. A
materialist will at once stop us if we just assume the existence of the spiritual, and tell us
that that is exactly the point in dispute, and that we have no right to take it for granted. Or
again, suppose that we should talk as though the existence of an absolute God were a
question about which there could be no dispute; there is no doubt that all of our
antitheistic opponents would at once stop us and say that we should prove instead of take
for granted the existence of God.
Yet it is not as though we are merely claiming for ourselves nothing more than we are
willing to grant to our opponents. Christianity is not merely the most tenable hypothesis
that one can find for the interpretation of the world. Christianity is no hypothesis at all. It
is accepted on the authority of the self-attesting Christ of Scripture and at the same time it
is the presupposition without which predication is unintelligible.
What our opponents mean by the existence of any “fact” is existence apart from God.
That they mean just this is indisputable for the reason that such existence apart from God
is ipso facto predicated of all “facts” except of the “fact” of God, if the “fact” of God is
called a question. For anyone to call the existence of God in question he must at least
himself exist, and possibly exist apart from God.
It appears then that the very connotation of the term “existence” is in question. The
antitheist maintains that the term existence may be applied as a predicate to any “fact”
even if the “fact” of God’s existence is not a fact. On the other hand the theist maintains
that the term “existence” cannot be applied intelligently to any “fact” unless the “fact” of
God’s existence is a fact. In other words, the antitheist assumes that we can begin by
reasoning univocally, while the theist maintains that we cannot begin otherwise than by
reasoning analogically, i.e., on the presupposition of the truth of that which the Scripture
says of God.
The contention of the previous paragraph is sometimes granted to a certain degree.
Idealist writers on philosophy in general and on morality in particular will often base
their very argument on the idea that the full meaning of a predicate applied to any “fact”
does not appear till it is seen in its fullest possibilities. So, e.g., A. E. Taylor, in his recent
work The Faith of a Moralist, argues that the full meaning of morality does not appear
unless it is brought into relation with religion and religion brings one into relation with
the question of the existence of God. According to Taylor and many others of general
theistic inclinations, the question between theism and antitheism is one of a fuller or a
poorer connotation of predicates that are to be applied to the “facts” of experience.
Meanwhile it is taken for granted by Taylor that there is at least a common denotation
with which all must begin. So Taylor speaks constantly of the fact of the life as the
ultimate starting point. He seeks to show what the implications of this “fact” of the moral
life are, and one of the implications of this “fact” he finds to be the existence of God, but
for all that the fundamental error remains that the denotation of the moral life is taken for
granted apart from the connotation. It is this that accounts for the seemingly strange
phenomenon that though Taylor himself makes much of the necessity of reasoning
analogically instead of univocally, he reasons univocally after all. Taylor applies the
predicate existence to the “fact” of the moral life without asking whether the moral life
can exist at all apart from God. A genuine theism cannot allow that denotation can be
thus separated from connotation. If it is true that “in him we live and move and have our
being,” we cannot start arguing any “fact” as though it might have its being apart from
God. It is impossible to separate the that from the what, or denotation from connotation.
If the theistic position is true, the that or existence of any finite “fact” depends upon the
what or connotation. God has given that fact. If theism is true, connotation and denotation
are identical in the case of the personality of God. The what of God is the that of God. It
is this that furnishes the foundation for and is the ground of the necessity of analogical
reasoning. The only exhaustive alternative to this position is to say that in the case of any
finite “fact” its that and its what are independent and need no reference to God at all. To
say that the that of a “fact” is independent of the existence of God but that the what of a
“fact” cannot be understood unless reference is made to God, is to try to reason both
univocally and analogically at once, and therefore to reason independently of God and his
Word.
If then the term “existence” cannot be used carelessly, as though every one who used
the term meant the same thing by it, and if it may perhaps have to be used analogically
instead of equivocally, the question of nonexistence may also be used differently by
different people. The question that is often asked is whether one can think intelligibly of
the non-existence of God. These same people will sometimes insist that we cannot
intelligibly think of the non-existence of all reality. We are told constantly today that we
must take reality for granted and not ask questions about its origin. With respect to this
matter of non-existence, it would seem then that four theoretical possibilities are open.
There may be those (a) who think it reasonable to doubt the existence of God but
unreasonable to think of the non-existence of the universe. There may be those (b) who
think it possible to think intelligibly of the non-existence of both God and the universe.
There may be those (c) who think it impossible to think intelligibly of the non-existence
of either the universe or of God. Finally, there may be those (d) who think it possible to
think intelligibly of the nonexistence of the universe but impossible to think intelligibly
of the nonexistence of God.
Of these various possibilities it will at once be observed that the acceptance of any of
the first three positions puts one on the antitheistic side of the argument. Only the last
position is consistent with theism. But it will also be observed that in many instances any
one of the first three positions is taken for granted at the beginning of an argument
without awareness of the fact that those holding the position have therewith foreclosed to
themselves the possibility of arriving at a theistic conclusion. In other words, any one of
these three positions is thought to be consistent with the application of a strictly empirical
method of research which, it is thought, may lead to any conclusion whatsoever. As
illustrative of the first two positions we mention such a popular scientist as James Jeans.
He thinks it quite possible to come to a theistic conclusion about the nature of reality after
he has dismissed the question of the origin of the universe with a lighthearted remark that
we should not worry about such details inasmuch as accidents do happen and so the
universe may have come by accident. 1 As illustrative of the third position we may refer
to any of the number of anthropologists who are basing their work upon an idealistic
background. So C. C. J. Webb, in his book Problems in the Relation of God and Man,
clearly indicates his agreement with the Idealistic theory of the judgment which contends
that parts apart from the whole have no meaning, and synthesis can have no meaning
apart from an equally ultimate analysis. At the same time Webb thinks it quite possible to
investigate the phenomenon of the moral consciousness according to the ordinary method
of scientific empiricism. We may say then that on the one hand Webb thinks it impossible
to think intelligibly of the non-existence of either God or the universe, and still wants to
study the universe as though totally new things were appearing in it, while on the other
hand he thinks it quite possible to start with the antitheistic method of ordinary
empiricism and come at last to a theistic position.
1
 The Mysterious Universe, pp. 1–10.
Now if it be remembered that Webb’s procedure is only typical of the generally
Idealistic attitude to the whole question of the possibility of thinking of the non-existence
of all reality, it will be seen that we cannot be too careful in giving our assent to
arguments put forward by those who seem to come to a generally theistic position but do
not get there altogether. We cannot be too careful about asking what the starting point of
any one’s argument is. It is of the utmost importance that we find our way through the
maze of confusion that prevails on this subject.
As a help to clarification of this subject we may perhaps suggest a distinction between
an immediate and an ultimate starting point. By an immediate starting point is meant the
place where the knowledge of facts must begin. It is of course quite consistent with a
theistic position to say that we must start with the “facts” as that term is understood
ordinarily. Neither Augustine nor Calvin would have objected to saying that knowledge
of self was their immediate and temporary starting point. But when the question of an
ultimate starting point is raised the matter is different. In that case Augustine and Calvin
would both have to say that their ultimate starting point is God. That is, they could
intelligently think of their own non-existence but were unable to think intelligently of
God’s nonexistence. The difference may perhaps be brought out by the analogy of a
diving board. Suppose a diver was standing on the tip of a diving board and that all that
he could see of the diving board was the very tip on which he was standing. Suppose
further that all that he could see around him was water. Now if he should say that the
very spot from which he was about to make his leap is his starting point he might mean
either of two things. If we thought of him as unaware of the connection of the point on
which he was standing with the foundation on which it rested he would be speaking of
that particular spot as the permanent or ultimate starting point. On the other hand, if he
were fully aware of the fact that the tip of the diving board is only a tip of a board that
rests upon a solid rock under water, he might speak of that tip as a starting point but only
as an immediate starting point. The real and ultimate starting point for him would be the
foundation on which the whole diving board was resting. Similarly we may say that the
question at issue is not that of what is the immediate starting point. All agree that the
immediate starting point must be that of our everyday experience and the “facts” that are
most close at hand. But the charge we are making against so many Idealists as well as
Pragmatists is that they are taking for granted certain temporal “facts” not only as a
temporary but as an ultimate starting point. It is this that is involved in the method of
Webb just discussed. It is this that is involved, for example, when A. Seth Pringle-
Pattison in his book The Idea of God in Modern Philosophy tells us that in the first half of
the book he is not concerned so much with matters of the world beyond. He tells us that
he is dealing in the first section of the book with Appearances only and therefore all that
he need do is to take the reality of Appearances for granted. But he has no right to do this,
if more than an immediate starting point is intended. And that more than an immediate
starting point is intended is apparent from the fact that he thinks it quite possible to make
significant statements about the nature of these appearances without so much as taking
the noumenal realities into consideration. Yet the very point in question is whether any
statement can be made about any appearance at all without reference to the fact of God.
As an interesting and instructive example of the results that follow if one carries
through a complete process of reasoning upon the assumption of the independent
existence of the “facts” of the universe, we mention the conclusion to which A. E. Taylor
comes with respect to the knowledge of God. Taylor says: “Since the world of creatures
actually is a world of becoming, contingency and partial indetermination, if God
apprehended it otherwise, God would be Himself the victim of illusion: this so-called
knowledge would not be knowledge. A being in possession of all knowledge, of course,
knows the incomplete as incomplete, open alternatives as open alternatives. But the point
is that, though there might be contingency enough in what such a knower knows, there
would be no contingency in the knower himself. He would, for example, know that at this
moment of my life there are alternatives between which I can choose: but since he sees
all at once, he would also know that I am in the act of choosing one of the alternatives by
my choice, and which I am choosing. He would not be taken by surprise when I choose.”
2
 The point of importance in this quotation in this connection is that for Taylor certain
“facts” are assumed to exist in such entire independence of God that God must take them
just as he finds them. Taylor takes for granted that such qualifications as contingency,
completeness or incompleteness, open alternatives, etc., have to be taken as existing in
actual application to the facts of the universe in such a way that God’s knowledge of
these facts must be colored by these qualifications as ultimate. That this is the exact
opposite of the truly theistic position which holds that the quality of a fact depends upon
its relation to the “plan of God” is at once apparent. True, Taylor thinks he has escaped
this difficulty by saying that though there may be contingency in “what such a knower
knows, there could be no contingency in the knower himself.” This is a simple
inconsistency. If the qualifications of “facts” do not depend upon God to begin with, it is
difficult to escape the logical conclusion that God depends upon the “facts.” If such a
word as “contingency” means anything apart from the plan of God or God himself, it is
plain that God’s being and knowledge are dependent upon independent facts. God’s
knowledge is then no longer exclusively analytical but is also synthetical. In fine, we are
then back upon the old Platonic position of seeking the solution of all epistemological
problems in a union of temporal and eternal categories. God would certainly be taken by
surprise if the “facts” of the universe bring forth altogether new things.
The discussion of the preceding paragraphs may also serve to make the transition in
our consideration of the object of knowledge from the question of the existence of the
object of knowledge to that of the good and evil of the object of knowledge, or, as it is
called in epistemological language, the question of error. Offhand it would seem that the
question of error has nothing to do with the object of knowledge. Error seems to deal
only with the knower and not with the object known. The object known seems to be there
always and the same and the only reason for error seems to be that the knower does not
carefully observe or correctly conclude from his observation. But if the Christian theistic
position is true, error is definitely connected with the object of knowledge. According to
Scripture the moral evil of man has brought a curse upon “nature” so that it does not
really reveal itself in all the glory that it might. In fact, the curse of God rests upon all the
facts of the universe. We may bring this whole question to a point by focusing upon the
question of physical death in man. We purposely focus the question at this point because
in this instance there can be no debate between various interpreters of the biblical
position as to the origin of death, as there might be if we took the example of death in the
plant or animal world. As to the death of man, all believers in Scripture are agreed that it
2
 The Faith of a Moralist, Series 1, p. 430.
came upon man as the result of sin. Yet the body of man may surely be contemplated as
an object of knowledge, that is, as a part of the whole physical universe.
What now, we may ask, is the attitude of most investigators of nature on this
question? The answer is that most of them take for granted that there is no connection
between natural and moral evil. It is usually not considered to be worth anything more
than a smile when one presents the suggestion that the sin of man may have to do with
nature’s being “red in tooth and claw.” The phenomenon of death even in the case of man
is contemplated as a natural and normal conclusion to life. Radicals ridicule, and the
refined smile, when they read that there are people in Tennessee who pray about the
weather.
If we now ask whether this attitude of antitheists is justified, it is plain that it is not.
They ought first to justify the contention that “facts” exist in total independence of God.
In addition to that, they ought to show that this holds good for all the qualifications of the
“facts” as well as for their bare existence. They ought to show that predication has
significance upon an antitheistic basis. We are not now contending that such cannot be
shown. We are only interested to point out that even on such a question as that of the
object of knowledge both as to its existence and as to its qualifications, there is nothing
but hostility from the very start between theists and antitheists.
In this connection too we must briefly advert to the question of Scripture. According
to the Christian theistic position, we have seen that neither the denotation nor the
connotation of a “fact” can be known apart from God. But a part of the qualification of
finite “facts” is that evil is found in them. And since God is absolute, evil cannot be
ultimate. If it were ultimate it would limit God. Accordingly, evil must have come into
the universe by man. Man is therefore a sinner and worthy of separation from God. And
this separation will naturally be eternal inasmuch as God is eternal. But we would not
know this unless God had told us so. The very nature of sin involves blindness to this
very fact. The sinner takes sin to be normal for him. At most he considers himself to be a
victim of circumstances. Never will he of his own accord accept responsibility for the
entrance of sin into the world. Yet it is for his sin that darkness covers the “facts” or
objects of knowledge. As Moses put a veil upon his face so that the children of Israel
could not see the glory of God that shone upon his face, so in a sense there is a veil upon
nature so that man cannot see it as it is. But now comes the redemptive principle to set
matters right. In the objective sphere there is the supreme fact of the incarnation, the
death and resurrection of Christ as the Son of God and Son of man, and there is the
Scripture as the authoritative interpretation of these facts. By the incarnation and all that
it involves in the way of the life and death of Christ, the object of knowledge is
redeemed. That is, the object of knowledge is brought into right relationship with God
once more. And an aspect of this restoration is that true light is thrown upon it by the
Scriptures. The Niagara Falls cannot be seen at night unless there is a powerful
searchlight that throws light upon them.
The point of importance to note about this matter of Scripture is that according to the
Christian theistic position the Bible is an inherent part of the system of theism as a whole.
If man is a totally dependent creature, if this creature has fallen into sin so that the whole
of creation has for his sake been subjected to “vanity”; if the “facts” because created by
God must ultimately be interpreted by God as to connotation and denotation alike, there
must be a Scripture which brings this interpretation of God. But that Scripture must be,
we learn from Scripture itself. Without the Scripture as the word of the self-attesting
Christ we would know no fact for what it is, i.e., as set in the only framework in which it
can have meaning. It is of the utmost importance that Christians themselves become
aware of the exact position of Scripture in their thinking. All too often they carry forth
the old Scholastic doctrine that man can know certain facts by the exercise of his reason
but that he needs information about other facts by way of revelation. Now if the Christian
theistic view is true at all, there is no fact that can be known truly without the revelation
of Scripture. Reason and revelation should not be contrasted as two sources of
knowledge. It ought to be clearly understood that the “facts” by virtue of their creation by
God cannot be known otherwise than by revelation. By virtue of creation the “facts” are
themselves a revelation of God. And the revelation of God in the facts of the created
world was, from the beginning supplemented by the “supernatural” word revelation of
God. Hence if reason is to function fruitfully it must always function upon revelational
material. Reason as one “fact” among others is itself a revelation. This much is implied in
theism. In addition to this we must maintain that no “fact” can be truly known, now that
sin has come into the world, without the special revelation of Scripture, because it is only
through Christ and the Scriptures that “facts” are seen as they are, that is, as theistic
“facts.”
We are interested in all this only to see what bearing it has upon the starting point of
knowledge as far as the object of knowledge is concerned. And we must note therefore
that on this very point the difference between the theist and the antitheist is very marked.
This scarcely needs elaboration since it is a fact of common knowledge that not only
avowed antitheists take for granted that one can start an investigation of many “facts”
without any reference to Scripture at all. We must analyze still further the theory that we
can begin the course of factual investigation without reference to the Bible.
The first argument advanced is that there can be no argument about this. Everybody
naturally begins with the “facts,” we are told. Would it not be the height of absurdity
when the subject under investigation is some form of animal life in the heart of Africa to
consult the Bible about information as to that “fact”? Yes, we answer, that would be
absurd, but that is not what we mean. We are not speaking of getting definite bits of
information about certain definite “facts” of biology or physics. But it will be granted at
once that whatever “fact” there may be in the heart of Africa or anywhere else is a part of
some great realm of “facts” such as those mentioned. The very purpose of scientific
knowledge is to set facts into relation to one another. All the facts of these realms of
knowledge have certain qualifications. One characteristic of these facts is that
decomposition works among them. Is this a natural something? The antitheist, we have
seen, takes for granted that it is a natural something. But we have also seen that he is not
entitled to assume this position. It is in Scripture alone that we come to an alternative
interpretation of these facts of Africa. It will be necessary for an investigator in Africa to
take into consideration this other interpretation that is given to the fact that he is
investigating. The Bible tells him that the interpretation that he by himself gives to that
“fact” or any other “fact” is quite wrong. The Bible does not claim to offer a rival theory
that may or may not be true. It claims to have the ultimate truth about all facts.
Consequently if one launches out upon a tour of investigation without his Bible he
has already rejected this claim of the Bible and is duty bound to find a solution for the
facts that he is about to investigate or make reasonable the claim that no solution can be
found. Even to say that a solution may be found in the future without reference to the
Bible is to put the Bible aside. Now such “solutions” as scientists have come to of late
themselves indicate that the “fact” of knowledge itself remains unaccounted for if
Scripture is left out of account. James Jeans, for example, says that science has no
pronouncement to make about the nature of reality. He holds that no one can say what the
nature of reality is. Such a conclusion shows that if one begins investigation of any of
knowledge without Scripture he will not come to a theistic position in the end. The
argument for the necessity of Scripture is accordingly the same in form and in force as
the argument for the necessity of thinking of the “facts” as standing in relation to God at
the outset of the investigation. Hence if it is unreasonable to start out an investigation by
assuming that the “facts” exist in total independence of God, it is equally unreasonable to
start on an investigation without the Bible. The reason for this is that only from Scripture
do we know God.
We conclude then that the fact that “everybody” does take it as an obvious thing that
we must “begin with the facts” is quite innocent because meaningless, if we signify by
that phrase that the locus of investigation is the African jungles, or that the Bible is not a
textbook of science. No one claims that one should go to the Bible instead of to Africa.
No one claims that the Bible is a textbook on science. All that we claim is that avowed
antitheists should tell us why they do not take their Bibles with them to Africa. We
cannot rest satisfied with the mere information that they do not take their Bibles. That is
interesting biographically and when analyzed as above has epistemological significance,
but it does not justify their procedure.
A second reason given for not beginning the investigation of any object of knowledge
with the Bible in hand is the contention that such a procedure would be to prejudice the
case. It is, for instance, a condition of the Gifford Lectureship that men may not defend
any one form of revelation otherwise than by philosophical arguments that do not include
an appeal to authority. A, E. Taylor refers to this regulation several times in his Gifford
lectures on “The Faith of a Moralist,” in order to show constantly that his argument so far
as it involves definitely historical matters, and even matters that pertain exclusively to
Christianity, never involves an appeal to authority.
In addition to his anxiety to escape the charge of making an appeal to authority,
Taylor holds that the best argument for “revelation” can be made if one is careful not to
defend one’s own particular brand of revelation. We quote him at length in order to study
a typical argument for the antitheistic starting point. Taylor says: “In historical fact,
apologists for the several revelational religions have made an unnecessary complication
for themselves, and weakened the defense of revelation as a source of knowledge about
God, by yielding too much to the polemical desire of representing their own religion as
the only one possessing such knowledge, and its rivals as mere pretenders to a wholly
unreal revelation. Thus the apologist for one particular historical religion provides the
rejector of all with an argument, by using against his rivals weapons it is easy to turn
upon himself. But it is not really truly necessary to defend the reality of revelation as a
source of truth in one historical religion by refusing to admit its presence in every other.
Since the historical religions do not simply contradict, but also on many points confirm
one another, it is more natural as well as more charitable, to recognize that they cannot be
summarily dichotomized into one true religion and several false, but that truth, in
different measures may be found in all of them. Thus, for example, since Christianity and
Mohammedanism are in conflict on fundamental points, if one of them is the truth, the
other cannot be. But this does not justify a Christian controversialist in simply dismissing
Mohammed as the ‘false prophet,’ and his religion as an ‘imposture.’ That religion, like
Christianity, testifies emphatically to the divine unity, as the reality of providence.” 3
Taylor has given expression to what lives in the hearts of many. Moreover, Taylor’s
way of stating the argument is very thorough and exhaustive. If we have shown the falsity
of it we need not fear that Pragmatists will come with a better argument. Taylor himself
is far from being a Pragmatist. He does not even wish to be classed as an objective
Idealist. He defends his position as being that of theism. His position justifies us in saying
that he seeks to make a close approach to the traditionally theistic position. All the more
remarkable, then, is the fact that Taylor should use an argument such as we have quoted.
The first thing that we may note about this argument is that at its conclusion it holds
that, for example, Christianity and Mohammedanism may be “in conflict on fundamental
points” and yet be in total agreement on other no less fundamental points. He does, to be
sure, make the admission in the section that follows our quotation, that from the Christian
point of view it would be important to “distinguish carefully between, for example, the
truth of the divine unity and distortions of the conception of God in Islam by reckless and
one-sided insistence on unity.” Yet Taylor’s contention clearly is that it may truthfully be
said that Christianity and Mohammedanism agree on the fundamental truth of the unity of
God, while they differ radically on other fundamental points. This way of putting the
matter is good if no more than a popular statement is desired. In a philosophical
discussion marked with the care of an acute reasoner it is out of place. Especially is it out
of place in one who stands upon the high level of a generally theistic position. It ought to
be patent that if there are fundamental differences anywhere between Christianity and
Mohammedanism there are fundamental differences everywhere. If there is a real
difference of interpretation on the question of any historical fact there must be a
difference of the conception of God. Taylor has himself labored to bring out the idea that
the full connotation of any historical phenomenon cannot be found without reference to
eternal categories. To say then that there may be fundamental differences at one place
and fundamental unity at another place is not only to say that one of the two must lack a
comprehensive interpretation of all facts, but is really to say that both Christianity and
Mohammedanism lack unity of interpretation.
And with this criticism we have also suggested the main weakness of the whole
argument of Taylor on this question. The very contention of Christian theism is, as we
have seen, that every historical “fact” must be interpreted in the light of the existence of
an absolute God. It follows logically that only one historical religion can be the true
religion. Any Christian apologist is shirking his duty if he does not say that Mohammed
is a false prophet. This is not to indulge in anything uncharitable. Charity has nothing to
do with the question. Nor is it to indulge in an easy dichotomizing process. It is, to be
sure, to indulge in dichotomizing, but it is the dichotomizing of a Luther before the Diet
of Worms. If theism is truly Christian theism, it is true because it is involved in the very
concept of theism.
The same argument appears in still another form when, to illustrate from Taylor
again, it is said that Christianity has limited itself to statements about faith and morals.
3
 The Faith of a Moralist, Series 2, p. 95.
Taylor realizes that this does not entirely relieve the situation because, thinking more
carefully than the modernist, he sees that faith and morals are inextricably interwoven
with simple matters of fact even in the physical realm. Yet even Taylor does think it to be
an apologetical advantage to hold to such a limitation. It at least seems to leave room for
the study of facts that have nothing to do with faith and morals, so that there is a field in
which the Christian and non-Christian stand together on neutral ground. But it ought to
be apparent that one need only to carry out Taylor’s own suggestion that faith and morals
are interwoven with matters in the field of physics to overthrow the argument adduced.
The Christian argument for immortality involves, for example, that what seem now to be
irrevocable laws of physics will one day be abrogated. Christ speaks of the “regeneration
of all things,” by which he means the culmination of the redemptive process to the very
circumference of the universe. One cannot with a toss of the hand dismiss the “cosmical
significance of Christianity,” as though this did not imply a radical alteration of the
space-time world. 4
There is no apologetical advantage involved in a limited concept of revelation. On the
contrary, there is a great apologetical disadvantage. In fact the apologetical disadvantage
involved is so great that it amounts to giving up your argument before you begin to argue.
If you allow that any “fact” is, strictly speaking, beyond the field of faith and morals,
there are no faith and morals left as far as Christianity is concerned. If there is one fact
beyond the field of faith and morals there may be, for all we know, a thousand; and there
is no telling whether faith and morals will effect the “regeneration of all things.”
The result of the limitation of Christianity to faith and morals may be seen from the
quotation that we now proceed to give from Taylor. On the same page on which his
distinction just before referred to occurs, he goes on to speak of “historical accidents.” He
says, “It is a more serious matter that they have often revolted the sensitive conscience, as
some of them still continue to revolt it, by making the eternal welfare of men depend on
the historical accident of acquaintance even when wholly unavoidable, has been put, in
this respect, on a level with deliberate and obstinate rejection of the truth.” 5
This quotation, it will be noted, involves the whole question of the philosophy of
history. Are there such things as “historical accidents”? How is one historical or space-
time “fact” related to another and to every other space-time fact? This problem may be
called the question of the object-object relation. We must have knowledge not only of
one object, but we must have knowledge of the relation of this one object to other objects.
It is even necessary to say that we do not have knowledge of one “fact” unless we know
what its relation to other “facts” implies. “Facts” cannot be said to be known apart from
laws. Or we can say particulars cannot be known apart from laws. We shall have to say
more of this when we come to the argument against Pragmatism. For the present our only
purpose is to consider this thing as far as the starting point of knowledge is concerned.
And then it ought to be observed that it will not do to assume that the universals of
knowledge are the product of mere accidents. Taylor has again taken for granted what
should be proved.
Every fact of history, Calvinism holds, happens according to the secret counsel of
God. Using epistemological language we may express this idea by saying that the
4
 Faith of a Moralist, Series 2, p. 51.
5
 Op. cit., 2, p. 51.
universals that bind the particulars of history, as well as these particulars themselves,
have their origin in God. God has created the human race as a race, which means that all
are related to one another. We have already had occasion to advert to this point when
speaking of the doctrine of total depravity and of covenant theology as taught by Calvin.
We then saw how a covenant theology is the only form of theology which gives a
completely personalistic interpretation to reality. So we observe again in this connection
that if we speak of “historical accidents” when referring to the fact that some men do and
some men do not have a knowledge of the gospel, we are assuming that man is placed in
an impersonal universe. It will then be impossible to come to a theistic position at the end
of our investigation. Thus one has assumed an antitheistic position at the outset of the
argument.
Taylor himself suggests the form of the only solution that can be given to the question
of why one person comes into contact with the gospel and another does not. He tells us
that after all the problem as to why some have and some have not access to the revelation
of Christianity may be compared to the question why some have and some have not
prosperity in life, and as to this he says, “That problem admits of no solution, except that
of Uncle Toby—and St. Paul—that God in His wisdom has disposed it so.” (In a note
Taylor quotes Sterne, Tristram Shandy, 3, 41: “There is no cause but one, replied my
uncle Toby, why one man’s nose is longer than another’s but because that God pleases to
have it so—that is Grangousier’s solution, said my father. ‘Tis he, continued my uncle
Toby—who makes us all, and frames and puts us together in such forms and proportions,
and for such ends as is agreeable to his infinite wisdom.”) Now the thing of importance
here is that when it concerns a matter of the length of noses, Taylor thinks uncle Toby
and St. Paul’s answer quite sufficient, but when it comes to seriously seeking a solution
for the difficult problem of the philosophy of history, he has refuted St. Paul’s solution by
stating it. Right here then is a striking instance of the most fundamental difference
between a true theism and a false theism. The one does and the other does not accept God
as the solution of the mystery of existence. A true theism really means what it says when
it claims that reality must be interpreted in exclusively eternal categories.
This quotation of Taylor also enables us to see exactly what we mean by criticizing
Taylor’s conception of the historical accident. We have seen to what conclusion he came.
The complete rejection of God as the final solution of life’s most baffling mysteries is the
thing that he takes for granted as being so much a matter of course that one need not ever
argue but only state the point. And this conclusion inevitably follows from the way he
began. We saw before that, according to Taylor, if God is to know all things he must
know them as contingent. Contingency, according to Taylor, has significance apart from
God. So in this instance the historical is given an independent existence first and
thereupon the attempt is made to arrive at the existence of God. All this has simply taken
for granted the whole of the antitheistic position. It will not do to make a simple
dichotomous division between those that do believe in an absolute God and those that do
not, and assume that those that do are all wrong before even an argument is begun.
Still more fully does the unfairness of such a type of argument appear if we follow
Taylor once more by focussing attention more particularly upon the eternal punishment
that, according to orthodox theology, is involved in the “historical accident” of not
knowing the Christ. Continuing the argument from where we last considered it, Taylor
says, “The alleged moral difficulty only arises when we go on needlessly to complicate
the problem by the assumption that a God of infinite wisdom and goodness penalizes His
creatures for not possessing what He has not seen fit to bestow on them; and this
assumption, we may fairly say, is obsolete in any form of historical religion which is a
live option tot educated Europeans today.” 6 In a note on this Taylor says that he knows
of no Christian communion that teaches that the heathen are lost unless they hear of the
gospel. Now Taylor ought to be aware of the fact that he is stating the whole problem in
an unfair way as far as the solution offered by the orthodox Christian position is
concerned. According to Christian teaching God is not punishing creatures simply for
what he has not been pleased to give them. According to Christian teaching God gave to
generic man just what he needed. The heathen are therefore, as Paul teaches, not innocent
victims of circumstances but haters of God. If this interpretation of the matter is to be
rejected it ought to be rejected for good and weighty reasons since the matter is of such
infinite importance. It will not do to dispose of the matter by saying that it is no longer a
live option for educated people. That may be true, but it may also be true that it ought to
be a live option for uneducated and educated alike. The only way in which the Pauline
interpretation could be rejected would be to show that the whole doctrine of the
interrelationship of the human race is not a fact that is based upon the plan of God. It
cannot be assumed to be wrong at the outset of the argument.
Summing up our discussion of the matter of the object of knowledge as far as the
starting point is concerned, we enumerate the following points of importance:
A. We may start our process of acquiring knowledge and of discussing whether we
have true knowledge with any “fact.” But this is only the immediate or proximate starting
point. The real difficulty begins with the question of an ultimate starting point.
1. Here the question is as to what we mean by the existence or denotation of any
“fact.” It will not do to take for granted that the term existence can intelligibly be applied
to any “fact” if that “fact” is thought of as separated from God. That is just the one point
at issue.
2. In the second place, the question of connotation must come up here. Again, it will
not do to take for granted that the connotation of a “fact” can be established apart from
any reference to God.
The whole contention of the Christian theistic position is that what is called the
subject-object relation, that is, the possibility of my having knowledge of any object
whatsoever, is unintelligible except upon the presupposition that every subject of
knowledge, since subjects are from this point of view also objects, owes its existence and
its connotation, in the last analysis, to God. Hence it will not do for antitheists to begin
their whole process of reasoning upon the assumption of the falsity of the theistic
position. The very contention of theism is that a fact, to be known truly, must be known
as a theistic fact. Hence it is manifestly illogical and unfair for the opponents of this
position to begin by assuming that facts can be known as antitheistic facts.
B. A similar argument holds with respect to the relation of Scripture to true
knowledge. Christian theism holds that without the light of Scripture no fact can be
known truly. Hence it will not do for our opponents to throw out this contention at the
outset as something which is not a “live option” to an educated person. The argument for
6
 Op. cit., Series 2, p. 54.
the necessity of Scripture, we have seen, is theistic in the sense that a true theism stands
or falls with the position given to Scripture.
C. The second main question considered was the object-object relation. It is the
question of nature and history. The contention of Christian theism is that there must be
laws in nature and in history, but that these laws have no meaning except upon the
presupposition of God that furnishes the binding cement for all the facts of spatial-
temporal experience. Accordingly, it will not do for our opponents to assume that nature
and history exist and operate independently of God.
Chapter 11:
The Starting Point Of Christian Theistic
Epistemology:
B. The Subject Of Knowledge: Extreme
Antitheism
Essentially the same questions that came up with respect to the object of knowledge
reappear when the subject of knowledge is to be discussed. There is once more the
question of the existence and connotation, there is once more the question of error. Yet
there are particular aspects of these questions that demand a separate discussion.
In the first place we would note again the difference between a proximate and an
ultimate starting point. This point is of particular importance here because it is even more
frequently when the subject of knowledge is discussed than when the object of
knowledge is discussed that these two intermingle. And there is in this case a special
reason why people have often been deceived. This reason is that some of the outstanding
advocates of the Christian theism have begun their researches by a careful analysis of the
self. Perhaps the instance that comes to mind first is also the most striking. Augustine’s
writings in general, and his confessions in particular, abound not only in profound
psychological observations but seem to base the argument for the existence of God upon
a linear inference from the phenomenon of the soul-life. Accordingly, some writers on
philosophy have not sensed the great dissimilarity between Augustine’s argument and
Descartes’ argument. Yet, as was pointed out in the chapter on Augustine, there was in
reality as much difference between them as there is between theism and antitheism. But
since Augustine himself did not make this fully clear, it is no great wonder that those who
from the nature of their whole position can allow for univocal reasoning only should not
have observed the difference. The great difference may be expressed by saying that
Augustine, Calvin and others of the most consistent theists have taken the human self and
reasoned from it as from a proximate starting point, while Descartes and the whole
antitheistic tradition in general has reasoned from the self as from an ultimate starting
point.
We feel that if this distinction is kept in mind, a more proper emphasis may be given
to the argument about the priority and the mutual dependence or independence of the
subject and the object of knowledge. In the case of Scottish Realism there is, to say the
least, an undue emphasis given to the attempt to establish a realism or independence of
the object over against the subject in order to escape the subjective Idealism of Berkeley.
Now this question is not devoid of importance. But its importance must be found in the
fact that if subjective Idealism cuts the subject loose from the object of knowledge or
denies the existence of anything beyond itself, it must, by the same argument, also cut
itself loose from God. In other words, subjective Idealism is a particular manifestation of
the antitheistic tradition which in ever varying forms asserts the independence of man in
opposition to God.
What we are most concerned about in this chapter is whether men take the human self
as a proximate or as an ultimate starting point.
It should be noted in passing too that it is in modern philosophy, in distinction from
ancient philosophy, that the subject of knowledge is emphasized instead of the object of
knowledge. Locke’s Essay on the Human Understanding and Kant’s Critique of Pure
Reason have emphasized the subjective approach to the question of philosophy. Add to
this point the fact that it was not really till modern times that the science of psychology
has come forth with prodigious clams about being the best road to an understanding of
reality, and it will be seen that when we discuss the question of the subject of knowledge
we are in the midst of the fray and should be aware of the possible consequences of our
every step.
For these reasons the plain man may rejoice in the fact that though there is a veritable
jungle of “facts” that are offered by both modern epistemology and psychology, there is
really only one simple issue that must be faced everywhere. This point is that mentioned
before: Is the human self taken as a proximate or as an ultimate starting point?
But though the issue is simple in itself, this does not mean that it is always easy to
detect whether one uses the self merely as a proximate or also as an ultimate starting
point. There are many and subtle ways in which men try to introduce, even at the
beginning of their discussion, conceptions about the self that cannot legitimately be held
except after long and careful argument.
Our question then in this chapter is more particularly whether men should be
permitted to begin a course of reasoning on the human self from the basis of the
assumption that takes the human self for granted as the ultimate subject of knowledge.
The basic contention of Christian theism with respect to the self is that God is the
ultimate subject of knowledge. Man is and can be a subject of knowledge in a derived
sense because God is the subject of knowledge in the absolute sense. Theologically
expressed, we say that man’s knowledge is true because man has been created in the
image of God. And for this reason too there can be no dispute about the relative priority
of the intellect and the feeling of man. Since the personality of God is a complete unity,
so also the personality of man is a unity.
Our contention is that what antitheism has done in all of its history is simply to take
for granted that this position cannot be true. It has simply dichotomized the human race
into those that have and those that have no intelligence, and has said that the theistic
position is no longer a “live option” for educated people today.
We can do no more than indicate a few of the most outstanding forms of this method
of procedure.
Our historical survey has attempted to lay the finger upon this sore spot of antitheistic
thinking. We have seen that in the case of Plato it was, in the last analysis, the human
individual that was put forth as the standard of truth. In modern times Descartes
emphasized this very point. In Kant we have the most formidable modern expression of
this line of thought. He clinches this thing on modern philosophy and theology.
It is well to pause at this juncture to ask what modern thought has meant by the term
subjective. It is historically true that Kant’s position was directed against the subjective
Idealism that preceded him. It is often said that Kant took the old subject and the old
object of knowledge, about which Empiricism and Rationalism fought, into a new
subject, the subject of the transcendental ego. And then it is sometimes added that Kant’s
own position may once more be called subjective because he did not include the
noumenal world in his new subject. From this point of view true objectivity is not
reached until Hegelianism included into one great thought system the whole of reality. It
was thus that “objective Idealism” was born. For our purposes, it is important to note that
we must call any system of thought subjective if it sets up human thought or the human
consciousness as the ultimate standard of truth. That is the exact point of difference
between theism and antitheism on this score.
It has become quite the vogue to try to escape the scepticism involved in Kant’s
criticism of the traditional theistic arguments by saying that the aspects of feeling have as
much significance as the aspect of intellect. In other words, the unity of personality has
been emphasized in modern times and it is thought that therewith room is made for faith.
It should be noted, however, that it makes no difference, as far as the issue between
theism and antitheism is concerned, whether one depends chiefly upon the human
emotions or upon the intellect as a final starting point and standard. Anything human, if it
is made the ultimate standard, is clearly antitheistic.
Thus Schleiermacher, the “father of modern theology,” bases his whole theology
upon a subjective approach of the feeling of dependence.
Thus Ritschl separates science and religion in order to make religion free from the
attacks of historical investigation. But the main thing to observe about Ritschl is not that
he has separated the human subject from historic fact. This is highly important, to be
sure, but it is highly important because by doing: this he also separated the human subject
from God. In other words, Ritschl’s particular form of subjectivism is sometimes
identified with subjectivism as such. It should therefore be kept in mind that one can lay
ever so much emphasis upon historical investigation and think truth to be dependent upon
history and be as much of a subjectivist, when the large question of theism and antitheism
is being discussed, as Ritschl himself.
When writers speak of experience this experience may first of all be contrasted with
the intellect. It is thus that some theologians have been writing of it in order to escape the
intellectual strictures of Kant. And it is thus that such scientists as J. Arthur Thomson,
James Jeans, and Eddington speak of it in order to bring comfort to those who wish to
accept the authority of the scientist as final and yet would like to retain a little room for
religion. According to these scientists it is possible to have a complete intellectual
agnosticism as advocated by Jeans at the conclusion of his book The Mysterious
Universe, and still retain one’s religion intact.
In the second place, when writers talk of experience, they may mean independence of
history. Thus the “value judgments” of Ritschl that have become so popular in American
pragmatic theology seek to retain the validity of religious experience in independence of
biblical criticism. True, Ritschl does want to attach some significance to history, but he
wishes, in the last analysis, to retain the independence of the religious subject over
against anything that may have occurred in the “objective” sphere.
In the third place, what many writers of more recent times mean by experience is
something that does not exclude reference to the intellect, to the object, and to history.
What is meant by experience today is the accumulation of the reactions of the human race
to the universe as it is. By that we mean that the Biologism of John Dewey has influenced
many writers on theology, so that they do not separate the objective and the subjective as
was formerly done, but take the knowledge relation as one of the ordinary functions of
human life. One can, for instance, observe that the most ardent advocates of experience
as the standard of religious truth are, at the same time, interested in historical
investigation. In other words, the whole evolutionary process must be traced in order to
understand the present day experience of the race. Similarly too, the distinction between
intellect and experience is wiped out. The intellect is now included in the term
experience. And the very rigidity of the intellect that the earlier advocates of experience
feared, and because of which they excluded it from the term experience itself, is taken
away by once more introducing the concept of development. History is invoked in order
to show us that what now appears as the hard bones of the intellect once was as flexible
as flesh itself. In other words, as a child’s bones are flexible at first but become less
flexible with age, so also what our fathers considered nothing more than postulates we
consider to be petrified axioms. 1
We may see from these varying meanings of the term experience what the assumption
of the human self as an ultimate starting point must lead to. It leads to a complete
relativism in epistemology and metaphysics. It is impossible to retain the independence
of the individual consciousness for long in opposition to the “object” of knowledge. If the
self is to be truly independent, reality must be made subject to the constructive function
of the self, or the self must be made a part of the object of knowledge. The whole
knowledge relation between subject and object of knowledge must be transacted without
any reference to God if either the subject or the object of knowledge is thought of as
existing by itself to begin with. Then too, it is impossible long to maintain the
independence of the individual in opposition to the race and the history of the race. The
individual man’s knowledge depends upon the knowledge the race has gained. If then the
individual’s knowledge is to be based upon an independent starting point, it cannot be
otherwise than that the whole of human history and the whole of temporal reality exist
independently of God. And it is because the Pragmatic philosophers and theologians have
seen the force of this that they have not been backward in proclaiming that not only does
the object of knowledge exist in independence of God, but the subject of knowledge
contributes the whole of the interpretative element of experience. But this also proves that
instead of starting with the assumption that the human mind, whether individually or
collectively conceived, can be the ultimate starting point of knowledge, the Pragmatic
theologian should have given reasons for his procedure.
It may serve a useful purpose to indicate where one may find definite examples of the
assumption of the individual consciousness of man as the ultimate starting point of
epistemology. One can, to begin with, mention the fact that in many leading universities
theology has been replaced by anthropology. Of course the name theology is retained, but
the connotation of the term is changed. Instead of holding that theology studies the actual
revelation of God to man, it is said that theology must study what man has thought about
God. The assumption underlying this conception of theology clearly is that the human
mind was independent of God to begin with.
More definitely one may see that the usual method employed by the various schools
of the philosophy and psychology of religion assume that the origin of the human
consciousness had nothing to do with God. It is a common thing to see men enter upon
the investigation of the phenomenon of religion without asking the question whether or
not religion can originate from the non-religious but by simply assuming that it can.
1
 cf. F. C. S. Schiller, “Axioms as Postulates,” in the book, Personal Idealism.
Perhaps the most extreme form of this antitheistic assumption appeared some years
ago when it was the fashion to look for religion in the animal world. According to this
view it is possible to have religion without having either self-consciousness or God-
consciousness. According to this view too, man may be the object of the religious
transaction as well as the subject. Thus God is reduced to nothing more than a symbol of
the next higher empirical category of spatial-temporal existence.
Thus the explanation of the origin of religion given by F. B. Taylor in his book
Primitive Culture, namely, animism, and the explanation given by H. Spencer in his book
Ecclesiastical Institutions, namely, ancestor worship, take for granted that the religious
transaction can take place without any reference to God.
The views of M. Muller and Schleiermacher resemble one another in that they both
maintain that it is of no consequence whether one believes in a personal God or not as far
as religion is concerned. 2 Our criticism at this point is not that this position is untenable,
but that the writers should have justified their belief that it is tenable. This they failed to
do. They no doubt do try to justify their position to some extent, but not at the outset of
their investigation where, more than anywhere else, it needs justification.
The chief schools of philosophy which furnish the foundation for the work that
theologians have done in the field of the philosophy of religion may perhaps be classified
as follows:
There is first the openly pragmatic school of thinkers. We use the term pragmatic here
in a loose sense in order to include not only the leaders of the school of Pragmatism such
as F. C. S. Schiller, James, and Dewey, but all the advocates of the open universe,
whatever their specific name. As such we may mention the philosophers of evolution
such as Henri Bergson (Creative Evolution), S. Alexander (Space, Time and Deity), C.
Lloyd Morgan (Emergent Evolution), R. Wood Sellars (Evolutionary Naturalism:
Principles and Problems of Philosophy) and others. William James is of special
importance in this connection because he writes a book that deals more directly with
religious experiences (Varieties of Religious Experience). The assumption throughout this
book is that religion can really function no matter what its object. In general we can
characterize these writers by saying that they openly avow the self-sufficiency of
temporal categories and of man’s power to interpret reality for himself.
In opposition to the first group mentioned, there is a second group that emphasizes
logic rather than time. We call attention to three men of great ingenuity here.
Bertrand Russell is first a great mathematician, and secondly a brilliant philosopher.
In his works, Problems of Philosophy and Scientific Method in Philosophy, there seems
to be a desperate effort to find an object of knowledge that shall contain no interpretative
material at all, and therefore be altogether given. B. Bosanquet, in criticizing this effort of
Russell says: “The hunt for the psychologically primitive is the root of all evil.” 3 By
saying this, Bosanquet means that Russell tried to get at something within human
experience that should be absolutely given and therefore objective. Bosanquet criticizes
2
 “Ob man sich dagegen dies Eine unedliche Wesen als ein personliches oder
unpesonliches vorstelle ist nach Schleiermacher von untergeordneter Bedeutung; mit
beiden Vorstellungen kann die gleiche Innigkeit des religiosen Gefuhls verbunden sein.”
O. Pfleiderer, Geschichte der Religionsphilosophie, Vol. 1, p. 307.
3
 Phil. Rev. 1915: review of Russell’s Our Knowledge of the External World.
Russell’s view because it seeks one aspect of human experience as the only spot where
one reaches reality without an intermixture of interpretation. But whatever we may find
to be “the psychological primitive,” as long as it seeks objectivity by a direct contact with
the universe without an equally and more fundamental contact with God, it is thoroughly
antitheistic.
On the other hand, Russell as a mathematician is greatly interested in the conception
of law, and assumes that law exists in total independence of God. Thus the whole
knowledge transaction is analyzed without so much as asking the question whether
knowledge is possible without God. 4
As the chief representative of this second type of thinking, we mention J. E.
McTaggart. McTaggart contends that time is unreal. This corresponds roughly to the
second position of Plato in which he tried to interpret the whole of reality by an exclusive
reference to the Ideal world. It is this motif that McTaggart has worked out more fully
than anyone else. 5
McTaggart has not hesitated to draw the conclusion which, as has been pointed out, it
is necessary to draw once one places himself upon this position, namely, that the whole
of reality is like a democratic society in which God can at most be a logical universal that
binds together equally ultimate particulars. Thus every individual human being is made
as original as God.
McTaggart considers his position to be the logical conclusion of the general Idealistic
theory of judgment. We cannot now discuss this claim in detail. Suffice it to recall that
the heart of the Idealistic theory of judgment may be said to be an insistence on the fact
that in every judgment unity and difference must be equally fundamental, and that the
difference of which mention is made be identified with the existence of a so-called
spatial-temporal world. In order then to make difference as fundamental as unity,
McTaggart does not hesitate to say that as far as the knowledge relation is concerned it is
necessary to think of man as being as eternal as God.
McTaggart’s claim has helped to clarify the atmosphere not a little. It is no longer as
easy as it used to be for Idealists to coil up underneath ambiguities in order to continue to
appear theistic. They are now before a clear-cut alternative. There are two ways open for
them. There is the way of the Pragmatist for whom time reality is quite able to interpret
itself without any reference to anything eternal. This would seem to be the most natural
and the most logical road for them to take, because it is not easy to do away with the
reality of time as McTaggart has tried to do away with it. Yet if they hesitate to go with
the Pragmatist they can try to follow the arduous path opened up to them by McTaggart.
The third man we would speak of briefly here is F. H. Bradley. In his essay
Appearance and Reality, Bradley contends that the whole world of appearance is full of
contradiction and therefore cannot be interpreted as being rational. Bradley means that
4
 cf. B. Russell, Problems of Philosophy and Scientific Method in Philosophy. For a
criticism of Russell’s position, see Mind, 1920, p. 414; International Journal of Ethics,
Jan. 1915, criticism by Broad; Journal of Phil. Psych. and Sc. Method, August 19, 1915,
criticism by Theodore de Laguna; J. B. Pratt, Adventures in Philosophy and Religion.
5
 Mind. N.S.V. 2, 1893, p. 490; Ibid., 1894, p. 190; Mind. N.S. 17, 1908, p. 457, and
especially the two-volume work The Nature of Existence. A. E. Taylor has criticized
McTaggart’s notion in his work The Faith of A Moralist, Vol. 1, p. 112ff.
the human mind cannot see exhaustively, through spatial-temporal reality. He assumes
that if the human mind cannot understand the nature of reality exhaustively, it cannot be
understood. True, Bradley tells us that “somehow” the contradictions that we see may not
be found in the absolute. But this very “somehow” of Bradley’s shows that for him God
comes in as a pious afterthought. In Bradley’s thought the conception of God has no
functional significance for human knowledge. The human mind is thought of as
functioning, though in a negative fashion, upon the world of appearance whether or not
God exists. In this respect Bradley resembles Kant. Both have finished the job of
knowing as far as the phenomenal world is concerned without reference to God. God is
relegated to some vague noumenal realm that forms a sort of marginal twilight addition to
the phenomenal real. The fact that according to Kant it is possible, and according to
Bradley it is not possible, to have rational knowledge of the world of appearance is not of
importance in this connection. The important thing is that both maintain that whatever the
human mind says about phenomenal reality it can and does say without reference to God.
In his two-volume work on logic Bradley develops the same view. In this work he
develops the Idealistic conception of logic as already adverted to in the case of
McTaggart. Bradley points out that analysis and synthesis must be equally fundamental
in every predication. 6 Otherwise expressed, Bradley says that unity and difference must
be equally fundamental. Yet he realizes that there is great difficulty in maintaining this
contention because it seems that in a temporal world there are always new facts appearing
that seem to have no relation to the facts that have preceded them. He says: “This twofold
nature of Reality by which it slides away from itself in our distinction, so as there to
become a predicate the while all the time it retains in itself, as an ultimate subject, every
quality we loosen from and relate to it is, if you please inexplicable.” 7 So instead of at
least considering the historical position of Christian theism that the reason why reality
seems for us to have these mutually exclusive characteristics is that we are finite and that,
if our knowledge is to have any significance at all it must therefore be based upon the
conception of God in whom unity and difference are harmonized, Bradley takes for
granted that if unity and difference cannot be harmonized by us it may be said without
further qualification that the problem is inexplicable. For Bradley, the ultimate test of
truth is what the finite mind can or cannot say about anything. And this is the point in
dispute between theism and antitheism.
Joachim, in his book The Nature of Truth, in this respect resembles Bradley. After
trying his best to see if it is possible to express the nature of reality in exclusively human
categories, he tells us that he has “reason to think that there is a fundamental opposition
of some kind at the very heart of things.” Again it is taken for granted that if there seems
to be fundamental opposition in the heart of things for man there must also exist this
fundamental opposition for God.
We now look at some of the writers of a third group of philosophers. This group is
more difficult to examine than the first or the second group. In the case of the first group
several writers did not hesitate to say outright that they have no need of God for an
interpretation of the knowledge transaction. They deem man, though temporally
conditioned, quite able to take care of the whole matter. The second group too are willing
6
 cf. 1, p. 252 ff.; 2, p. 471 ff., 662 ff., 629 ff.
7
 Logic, 2, 620.
to remain in a sceptic attitude if man’s knowledge does not suffice for itself. But the
group we now discuss (a) do not think that the temporal mind is in itself sufficient, and
(b) do not seek to eternize the temporal mind and are not ready to remain in the position
of scepticism. They frankly acknowledge the need of God. They try to connect the mind
of man and the mind of God. And yet, in acknowledging their need of God, they have not
really acknowledged their need of God, and in seeking after God they have not really
sought after him. To show this, is a thankless piece of work. In his recent humorous book
Adventures in Philosophy and Religion, J. B. Pratt presents “Dr. Idealist” as speaking to
Socrates and refusing to take Plato at his own word even if he should return from Limbo
and say that he was a dualist. Says Dr. Idealist, “My dear Socrates, if a person should
come to me representing himself to be Plato and at the same time confessing himself a
Dualist, I should thereby know that he was not Plato.” 8 Similarly it will be our task to
indicate that often a man may say that he is a theist in the sense that he is willing to admit
that the knowledge function of man cannot operate unless God exists, but that he is not
really a theist. There is nothing unfair about this. A jury does not take everybody at his
word and is not ridiculed because it does not. A jury would be ridiculed if it did take
everyone at his word.
The thing that strikes us most of all perhaps when we read writers of the Idealist
school is that they not only admit their heed of God, but that they seem to profess a
greater need of God than the Christian theist does. Expressed in terms of our comparison
between a proximate and an ultimate starting point, it would seem that they, so far from
making man the ultimate starting point of knowledge, are not even willing to make him
the proximate starting point of knowledge.
This tendency among Idealists to stress the necessity of the existence of God reveals
itself in a general acosmic strain. We have observed this in the case of Bradley. For him
nothing that is temporal can have reality, or at least genuine reality. The same tendency
may be observed in Bosanquet. Bosanquet’s whole logic seems to be opposed to the
conception of the Pragmatic philosophers that reality is producing essentially new things.
One of his most basic contentions is that knowledge requires system, and that there could
be no system if reality were nothing but a disconnected series of events. To say anything
about anything, the whole of reality must be taken into consideration. “Thus it follows
from the nature of implication that every inference involves a judgment based upon the
whole of reality, though referring only to a partial system which need not even be actual.”
9
 When Bosanquet reasons thus against such men as the Pragmatists and the Italian
Idealists, he seems to introduce a sort of gradation into reality. Temporal reality seems to
be less real than eternal reality. Bosanquet says we must interpret the lower aspects of
reality in terms of the higher. Thus it would seem at first sight that Bosanquet cannot be
classed with those who have taken the human mind as the ultimate starting point.
Bosanquet maintains that the human mind itself is nothing independent but that it is
only a focus of the Absolute. Thus it seems that on the very question of the existence of
the individual human personality, Bosanquet is more theistic than the theist. Bosanquet is
strongly opposed to ascribing any independent existence to finite personality. And not
only is this the case with the existence of finite personality, but also with the
8
 Op. cit., p. 106.
9
 Implication and Linear Inference, p. 55.
interpretative powers of man. Here we reach the crux of the matter. Bosanquet says that
such predications as we apply to reality as we know it cannot be applied to absolute
reality because in the case of God there cannot be the limitations to which we are subject.
Take for example the conception of purpose. Our conception of purpose is, to a large
extent, colored by the idea of opposition that we meet. We seek to realize purposes in
spite of obstacles. But such, says Bosanquet, cannot be the case with God. Accordingly,
we cannot apply the concept of purpose to God. We cannot say that God purposed certain
things with respect to the universe. 10 Thus it seems as though on this point Bosanquet is
even more insistent than we have been. He very definitely maintains that the
interpretation of man is not only far from ultimate, but taken by itself is quite valueless.
The point is of such great importance that we must indicate still further that there thus
appears to be complete harmony in Bosanquet’s conception of the existence of man and
his interpretation of man. It appears that both must be destroyed before we can have true
reality and truth. In his book The Value and Destiny of the Individual he says that man
must completely deny himself before he can come in contact with the truth. 11 In this
respect Bosanquet agrees with Bradley who expressed the same sentiment by saying,
“The unit makes no insistence on its finite or isolable character. It looks, as in religion,
from itself and not to itself, and asks nothing better than to be lost in the whole, which is
at the same time its own best.” 12 Not till the individual loses interest in himself does he
feel “the nisus toward the whole.” In the same way Bosanquet demands that the human
being shall first deny his own categories of interpretations before he can be in contact
with absolute or divine categories of interpretation. How then is it possible with any show
of reason to maintain that Bosanquet must be classed among those who assume that
man’s mind is the ultimate starting point?
The first main consideration that must be thought of in this connection is that the
whole of Bosanquet’s argument against the Pragmatist position must be interpreted in the
light of his equally fundamental contention that though the temporal universe is not
ultimate in one sense, it is ultimate in another sense. Bosanquet discusses all the problems
of philosophy with deepest insight when he is discussing logic. And it is in his logic that
we are told that though it is true that analysis must be basic to all knowledge, it is equally
true that synthesis is basic to all knowledge. Under pressure of realistic and pragmatic
criticism he did not hesitate to say that reality is “inherently synthetic,” so that no change
from itself is needed at all to account for differences which are novel and creative, with
perfect continuity.” 13 In this insistence that the whole of reality is essentially synthetic,
Bosanquet has not only given back to the temporal world the reality that he seemed to
have denied it. He has done much more than that. By speaking of Reality without making
a distinction between eternal and temporal reality and then saying of this Reality that it is
inherently synthetic, he has virtually brought the eternal down to the temporal.
The real reason why the completely antitheistic nature of Bosanquet’s thought is not
always recognized is the fact that there is an ambiguity at the core of his thinking which it
is not easy to observe. It is therefore well to regard it carefully.
10
 The Principle of Individuality and Value, Lect. 4, p. 122 ff.
11
 p. 153 ff.
12
 F. H. Bradley, Mind. N.S.V. 19, p. 154.
13
 Phil. Rev. V. 32, 1923, p. 596.
The source of the ambiguity lies in his attempt to analyze the nature of the judgment
in a purely univocal fashion. He speaks of the judgment and takes for granted, without
critical analysis, that the judgment must reveal the same attributes in the same way in
God and in man. This point is of vital importance when the question of method is
discussed, but here we indicate the fact in order to bring out the idea that Bosanquet has
therewith assumed that man is as ultimate as God. If man were not as ultimate as God, it
would not do to proceed as though there were no difference between the two.
Because of this fundamental assumption Bosanquet proceeds to speak of Reality and
of the Absolute and of Being in general. The result, naturally, is that he assumes with
respect to these subjects that it is not necessary to ask whether it is possible to attribute
predicates to them indiscriminately. He assumes that all predication must center directly
upon the one mighty subject of Reality or Being or Absolute. In other words he assumes
that Reality or Being or the Absolute is the one and only subject of predication. Human
personalities are spoken of as being foci of the Absolute or mere connections of content.
The meaning of the word Reality that most accords with Bosanquet’s fundamental
contention in logic is that it is the Whole. Whatever ideas as a matter of fact exist,
Bosanquet would include in the subject of predication. To it, therefore, must be ascribed
somehow evil and good and indifferent predication.
We emphasize this point that the Whole is for Bosanquet the real subject of
predication because it can be clearly seen from it how centrally his philosophy strikes at
the Christian theistic position. It does away at one stroke with the difference between the
eternal and the temporal, God and man. It assumes that unity and difference are not found
in the bosom of the Trinity, but in the bosom of the whole of which the temporal universe
is already a part.
With respect to the sense world, Bosanquet’s position brings us back to the exact
place where Plato left us, namely, that it must be taken for granted as being underived.
Like Plato, Bosanquet realizes the difficulties involved in his position and tries to remedy
them to some extent by seeking to introduce the gradation motif that Plato had also
introduced. Plato called time a moving image of eternity. He was not willing to cede to it
as much reality as to eternity itself. Similarly Bosanquet speaks of the lower and the
higher aspects of reality. At times he emphasizes this point very much. We have noted
the acosmic strain in his thinking. He sometimes speaks of the Absolute as the Beyond.
And in correspondence with this he speaks of the things of the time world as though they
must be considered as of no value at all. A supreme instance of this is in his contention
that the human self must be wholly destroyed in order that the Absolute may have its way
in it. But this acosmic strain should not be interpreted as due to anything but an unwilling
recognition of the failure of the main contention of his system of thought. It is but natural
that anyone who makes the Whole the direct subject of every predication should devise
some ways and means by which to avert something of the obvious difficulties that would
seek to assert themselves. It is all too clear that we cannot well attribute the predicates
white and black to the same immediate subject without reducing human speech to a
meaningless series of vocables. Plato felt this difficulty when he did not know what to do
with the Ideas of mud and hair and filth. Similarly, Bosanquet has constantly spoken of
the Absolute as the ultimate subject of all predication. For the same reason he has spoken
of the Absolute as the Beyond. But it should be carefully noted that Bosanquet has
therewith not really escaped any of the difficulties involved in his logic. His Beyond and
his ultimate subject of predication always remain an aspect of the whole of Reality.
Never, in any of his writings, is the Beyond presented as existing by itself in total
independence of the world of sense. The world of sense always remains as the other
aspect of the same Whole of Reality. Reality may be very much condensed, so to speak,
at the upper end, and be very much rarified at the nether end, but the one never exists
without the other.
Bosanquet seeks to represent the Absolute as the place and source of unity, and the
sense world as the source of difference in logic. For Bosanquet the temporal is the one
and only source of ultimate differentiation. This is quite the opposite of the Christian
theistic conception which seeks the ultimate source of differentiation in the persons of the
eternal Trinity. No more fundamental difference is conceivable. It hits the heart of the
difference between theism and antitheism.
It may be objected that Christian theism too contends that the ultimate subject of
every predication is God, because it holds that all things that happen in the temporal
realm are related to the counsel of God, and that therefore in this respect Christian theism
and the position of Bosanquet would seem to be at one. But it should be observed that the
identity is apparent only. Of the Idealist position, it cannot be said that all things
historical happen in relation to the counsel of God. It is basic to the whole position that
Reality is inherently synthetic as well as inherently analytic. Thus Idealism has not only
an open universe, but an open God. Or we may first include the term God in the term
Universe or Reality and then say of the Whole reality that it is open. From this we may
fairly conclude that Bosanquet cannot make God the ultimate subject of predication.
Bosanquet’s God is not yet full grown, and what is more, never will be full grown as long
as time endures, because time brings absolutely new additions. Idealists would, of course,
object at this point that this is not a fair contention because the very foundation of
Idealism is that nothing absolutely new happens or that the so-called new is really related
to the old. But this is exactly the point also for our contention that Idealism is not entitled
to maintaining that nothing absolutely new occurs, because the unity which it seeks to
supply is no real unity inasmuch as it is itself inherently temporal.
And if it is true that for Bosanquet the temporal world is underived and is always an
aspect of the eternal world, as the eternal world is an aspect of the temporal world, it
follows that we must interpret the questions of the existence and the interpretative powers
of the human mind in its relation to the existence and the interpretative powers of the
divine mind in the light of this general correlativity.
In his book The Value and Destiny of the Individual, Bosanquet contends that the
individual must be completely denied in order to realize its “nisus toward the whole.” 14
We noticed that this is an evidence of the general acosmic strain in Bosanquet’s thought.
But now that we have learned to interpret this whole acosmic strain, not as an evidence of
theism but as itself an evidence of antitheism, we also see that this very insistence of
Bosanquet on the individual’s annihilation is itself an evidence of an assumed ultimacy
for the human mind. It was at most an attempt to do what McTaggart has so thoroughly
done, that is, to take the human mind up into the divine mind. And if he had been
successful in this man would still be at the least as ultimate as God. There would at most
be a correlativity between God and man. It may be said that Bosanquet cannot be held to
14
 Op. cit., p. 153 ff.
have equated man with God because he has altogether destroyed man. We reply that if it
be contended that Bosanquet has totally destroyed man’s individuality, he has done so by
identifying man with God and finding his reality in God. And if anything, this tells more
directly against his position than to say that he has maintained a sort of independence for
man. To equate man with God or to identify man with God has exactly the same result as
far as epistemology is concerned. In each case God is dethroned from the unique place he
occupies in theistic thought.
Most clearly and significantly does this appear if, in conclusion, we discuss the matter
of interpretation. We have seen that Bosanquet, perhaps more than any one of the
Idealists, has maintained that reality must be interpreted in eternal and not in temporal
categories. His insistence on this point corresponds to his insistence that the human
individual does not exist apart from the Absolute. But as in that case so in this, we do not
strike the heart of his conception of interpretation unless we notice that however much
Bosanquet seems to insist that reality must be interpreted in terms of the Absolute, it is
also true that man is considered to be a part of this Absolute, and therefore entitled to a
vote in the matter. This appears especially in the assumption, already alluded to, namely,
that he speaks constantly of thought without asking whether it is necessary to make a
distinction between divine and human thought. He takes for granted that human thought
is ultimate thought. For that reason it is not possible for Bosanquet to say that God or the
Absolute is the ultimate subject of every predication. He cannot do this since he identifies
God with the Whole, because in that case the whole of the whole is not in yet. But neither
can he do it if he identifies God with the Beyond, because even in that case the sense
world must be taken into consideration as an underived something to which predicates of
a certain sort must be applied, or from which predicates may at least be thought of as
originating.
Summing up the discussion, we would call special attention to the fact that in
whatever way one is pleased to interpret the philosophy of Bosanquet, whether in a more
pantheistic or in a more general theistic fashion, it remains a fact that for Bosanquet man
is not an absolutely derived being and for that reason does not need to and cannot
recognize God as the highest category of interpretation. He may, of course, use God as a
symbol for what he himself, in independence of God, has thought of as being the chief
characteristic of Reality, but God is not for him the ultimate interpreter of Reality.
Original reality is for him a larger concept than God. God is not the creator of the
universe but is an aspect of the universe. At most he can help man to interpret the
universe; he cannot interpret to man in an absolute fashion.
Again the important thing to remember is that this position of Bosanquet is not taken
because of any necessity of logic, unless it be a necessity of logic to begin with the
assumption of the greater ultimacy of the universe than of God. That Bosanquet has
assumed an antitheistic starting point is evident especially from the fact that he never as
much as questions the propriety of beginning the examination of a judgment by taking for
granted that all thought is essentially equally ultimate. He takes for granted that the ideas
of mud and hair and filth are as fundamental as the Ideas of good. In this respect he has
not advanced upon the Platonic philosophy. By this assumption he has taken for granted
that there is no absolute and that there can be no absolute. If one starts his investigation of
any object with the assumption of complete correlativity between God and man, not all
the king’s horses and all the king’s men will bring one to the position of theism. It is then
a foregone conclusion that no absolute will be found.
Chapter 12:
The Starting Point Of Christian Theistic
Epistemology:
C. The Subject Of Knowledge: Milder
Antitheism
We have given much time to a discussion of Bosanquet’s position because of his
controlling influence in later Idealist circles, and because of the fact that his conception
of logic underlies much of the later methods of Idealists. Moreover, the acosmic strain in
his thinking brings with it a peculiar temptation to think of Bosanquet as one who has
given too little instead of too much power to the human mind.
Our investigation of Bosanquet’s position, and especially our placing of the acosmic
strain in his thinking in the light of the whole of his philosophy, now enables us to
estimate aright the reaction that followed against Bosanquet in Idealist circles. This
reaction was directed largely against this acosmic strain of his thought. It was a renewed
emphasis upon the originality and ultimacy of the human individual against the
encroachments upon it by the Absolute of Bosanquet. But we have seen that Bosanquet’s
Absolute did not really encroach upon the human mind. If anything, it took the human
mind unto itself and gave it a constant place at its table as David did with Mephibosheth.
This reaction could not be in the interest of giving the human mind more originality than
it had in Bosanquet’s philosophy. The human mind could not be given more originality
than he had given it. He had made it absolute, and more than that no one could do. The
only reaction that was possible was one that would rebel against Bosanquet’s placing of
the individual in too close a connection with the absolute so that he might seem to lose
some of his individuality. The analogy would not be a rebellion against taxation without
representation, but rebellion against representation that is too far away. The insurgents
wanted not only independence, but home rule.
Then further it will be seen that the reaction against Bosanquet’s position could not be
in the direction of a true theism but only in the direction of something that looked like
theism. This is a most significant point. It is often thought that the reaction against
Bosanquet was in the interest of a greater emphasis upon a more theistic instead of a
more pantheistic approach to the problems of philosophy. The falsity of this contention
becomes apparent if it be recognized that an emphasis upon the human mind as the
ultimate starting point in philosophy could never be anything of an approach to theism
which is interested in nothing so much as in maintaining that not man, but God, is the
ultimate starting point in a true epistemology. We are not contending that the reaction
against Bosanquet led farther away from the theistic position because it was not really
possible to get farther away. Yet in a sense it may be said that the reaction was away
from theism because it was really a step in the direction of Pragmatism, which is more
outspoken in its opposition to theism than is Idealism. As it is true that Modernism is not
inherently any less atheistic than the A.A.A.A. Society but is less outspoken in its
atheism, so it is true that Bosanquet’s position is not any less antitheistic than
Pragmatism, but it is less outspokenly so. And the general reaction to Bosanquet has still
more often been identified with theism than the position Of Bosanquet, so that it is all the
more necessary to call attention to the fact that this general theism is as antitheistic as
Pragmatism, and may even be said to be a step in the direction of Pragmatism.
The first man we mention under this general group of writers is A. Seth Pringle-
Pattison. In his little book Hegelianism and Personality, he sounded the bugle call with
which to draw men away from the house of Bosanquet. Not as though his position
involved a denial of the Idealist conception of logic. At least it was not intended to be a
rejection of Idealism, but of the extreme form of Idealism as advocated by Bosanquet.
Pringle-Pattison did not wish to maintain that the human individual had any significance
apart from the Absolute of Bosanquet, but that it should not be destroyed as Bosanquet
had destroyed it. He tells us that he always has believed in the “essential relatedness” of
the Absolute and man. He does not advocate a complete pluralism. What he rebelled
against, he said, was the reducing of human individuals to “connections of content within
the real individual to which they belong.” In his book The Idea of God in Modern
Philosophy, he deals in the first part with the existence of the so-called world of
“Appearances.” In this first part he has little or no need of making reference to the
Absolute. This already shows that he has taken this world of Appearances for granted as
something ultimate.
Similarly, in a symposium held before the Aristotelian Society on the subject whether
individuals have substantive or only adjectival existence, Pringle-Pattison says that the
individual seems to be “the only conceivable goal of divine endeavor.” 1 Again, when
Bosanquet criticized his view of the individual by saying that on Pringle-Pattison’s basis
one must eventually be led to an ultimate Pluralism, the latter did not hesitate to say that
Bosanquet should not underestimate “the significance of numerical identity as the basal
characteristic of concrete existence.” 2 He is willing to grant that in themselves
individuals are mere abstractions, but he adds that in itself the Absolute is also an
abstraction. He says that Bosanquet’s philosophy tends “to reach a formal identity by
abstracting from differences on which the very character of the universe as a spiritual
cosmos depends.” 3
In this philosophy of Pringle-Pattison the term Reality or Being is again taken for
granted not only as inclusive of God and man, but as something within which God and
man are equally ultimate. If the argument were carried on upon the basis of pure logic the
position just outlined would resemble that of McTaggart. In both cases God is reduced to
the position of a logical Universal with no existence except in the particulars which he
binds together. In Hegelianism and Personality, he even spoke of the “Imperviousness”
of finite personality. He later saw that this way of stating the matter would lay him open
to the charge that his philosophy would end in Pragmatism, and therefore modified the
term. He does not want any sort of realism or empiricism because this forgets “the
abstraction under which it apprehends the structure of experience.” 4 According to
Pringle-Pattison it is altogether a matter of correlativity. No more than you can think of a
husband without a wife or of a wife without a husband, can you think of God without
1
 Proceedings, 1917–18, p. 511.
2
 Idem., p. 512.
3
 Idem., p. 522.
4
 Proceedings, 1917–18, p. 484.
man and of man without God. In the field of logic it may then be said that God furnishes
the unity and man furnishes the difference.
To this it should be added that those who furnish the difference are temporal beings.
It is true that this consideration does not add anything to the inherently antitheistic
character of Pringle-Pattison’s or any other man’s philosophy. Even if the reality of time
be denied and man is elevated into eternity itself and put on the level with God, the
antitheism is complete. Such a logical correlativity, no less than the temporal correlativity
of the Pragmatist, attacks the fundamental contention of theism which says that God is
not a correlative to man but has completely independent existence. Yet it is true that
when men take the reality of time for granted and take mankind as we see it about us and
make it metaphysically as ultimate as God, the completeness of the rejection of the
theistic position is still more clearly patent than it is in such logical systems as that of
McTaggart. In the latter case there would at least seem to be some meaning in the claim
that thus reality is interpreted in exclusively eternal categories. And because we have said
that only a true theism really interprets reality in exclusively eternal categories, it might
seem as though McTaggart’s position were theistic. But this plausibility is altogether
excluded in the case of Pringle-Pattison. He makes no such claim of eternity for man as
McTaggart does. He frankly equalizes the eternal and the temporal. As Bosanquet said
that Reality must be essentially analytic, and at the same time said that it must be
essentially synthetic, so Pringle-Pattison says that Concrete Existence, which is only
another word for Reality, must be essentially eternal and essentially temporal. And as
Bosanquet thought that his demand of an equality of analysis and synthesis was so much
a matter of fact that it needed not to be argued but should be taken for granted, so also
PringlePattison simply took for granted that the human individual is a charter member of
the Universe. Thus the whole antitheistic position is once more taken for granted instead
of proved.
We pause here to point out that the assumption of the human consciousness as the
ultimate starting point of epistemology is also made by those who have made it their
business to engage in the study of the philosophy and history of religion and morality
from an Idealist viewpoint. It goes without saying that Pragmatic philosophers such as
William James take for granted at the outset of their investigations that there is no
absolute religion, as they take for granted that there is no absolute God. This is implied,
for instance, in the method of James’ Varieties of Religious Experience, and in James
Bisset Pratt’s The Religious Consciousness, when they proceed as though it is an obvious
fact that by an exclusively empirical study of psychology it is possible to ascertain what
the true nature of religion is. But in the case of Idealists it would seem fair to say that if
they were really taking their Absolute seriously they would also maintain philosophically
that there must be an absolute religion, and that this would be an admitted “bias” which
they would carry with them to Africa or Australia. When we find therefore that the
Idealist makes every effort to prove that he is unbiased in his approach to the questions of
the psychology and the history of religion, we take this as an indication that he has really
never taken his Absolute seriously.
By way of illustration we may mention C. C. J. Webb’s approach to the question of
the philosophy of religion. In his book Problems in the Relation of God and Man, Webb
tells us that he is in full agreement with the Idealist theory of judgment. He says, “That is,
the union of God and man belongs to the very essence of both the one and the other.” 5 In
his later books he continues to hold to this correlativism of God and the Universe. There
is the same ambiguity in Webb’s thought that we found in Bosanquet’s thought, namely,
that at one time he speaks of the Absolute as the Universe which includes both God and
man, and at another time he speaks as though God is quite above and beyond the
universe. Accordingly, there is also an ambiguity in his conception of what religion is.
On the one hand he tells us that “the statement in which recent philosophers of various
schools in this country have concurred that ‘God is not the Absolute’ must, I am sure, if
taken seriously, make nonsense of religion.” 6 Thus it might seem that Webb recognizes
the need of a genuine transcendence for true religion. But then again it makes no
difference at all to him whether or not God is exalted above the universe. He says, “For I
do not think that religion is concerned with the nature of divine self-consciousness except
insofar as this may be involved in the reality of our personal relations with God; so long
as these are not regarded as figurative or illusory, we have no religious interest in
hesitating to confess without reserve that God’s thoughts are not our thoughts nor his
ways our ways.” 7 Here it appears that Webb thinks it possible for the whole religious
transaction to take place between two persons who are themselves within a common
universe. God, to be sure, ought to be a great deal bigger than we, if he is to be the object
of worship, but he need not be beyond the universe. Thus the antitheistic nature of
Webb’s thought begins to come to the surface. For theism the nature of the self-
consciousness of God is the thing of most fundamental importance, while for Webb this
whole question may be relegated to the sphere of secondary matters.
This same point comes to the fore once more when Webb discusses the conception of
personality in the case of the Trinity. Speaking of this distinction he says, “But this
personal distinction cannot be interpreted as involving a difference in personal character
without abolishing that unity behind and through all difference, which is what we
primarily have in mind in speaking of the Absolute at all. It could only involve such a
difference for those who could accept a genuine pluralism, which would appear in
religious form as a thorough going polytheism.” 8 In this quotation it appears clearly that
Webb cannot allow for a God in whom identity and difference are equally fundamental.
He fears that if the difference applied by the distinction of the personalities within the
Trinity is carried through, pluralism would be the result. Webb is not defending here what
the ancient church defended when it opposed the tritheists. The tritheists maintained not
only that the personal difference in the Trinity was basic. The church had no objection to
saying that. On the contrary the church cannot live unless the distinction of the Persons of
the Trinity strikes the very bottom of the Godhead, so to speak. The only alternative to
that is that the source of the plurality shall be found beyond the Trinity. But the reason of
the opposition to the tritheists was that they denied the fundamental unity of God as being
as basic as the personal distinctions. The contention of Webb, on the other hand, is that
you cannot do both at once. If you maintain the ultimacy of the personal distinction you
have therewith ipso facto done away with the possibility of holding to an ultimate unity.
5
 Op. cit., p. 240.
6
 God and Personality, p. 153.
7
 Ibid., p. 154.
8
 Ibid., p. 173.
The consequence is that the unity in which Webb believes as the very foundation of
intelligible speech is reduced to a logical universal in a mass of particulars.
We may speak then of Webb’s case, as in the case of many of his fellow Idealists, of
three different Gods that they serve at different times and on different occasions. The
main God of Idealism is the Whole, Reality, Universe or Being. But since this Whole has
two elements in it, namely, unity and difference, it is but to be expected that if the Idealist
is persecuted with the charge that his position leads to an open universe he will hasten to
identify the object of his veneration with the Beyond. On the other hand, if he is
persecuted by the pluralists and is told that his position leads to a denial of the reality of
the finite personality, he hastens to show that he did not mean his emphasis upon the
Beyond of the principle of unity so seriously. The most basic distinction in reality is that
of personality. The God he serves is really a Primus inter pares. Meanwhile it should be
noted that no matter which of these three Gods the Idealist may at a certain time be
serving, he is always equally antitheistic. In every case he has denied the most basic
contention of theism, namely, that it is exactly in the Trinity that the principle of unity
and the principle of diversity are equally fundamental. It is therefore never possible for a
theist to swing back and forth between an emphasis upon the unity and an emphasis upon
the diversity in the Godhead.
We have analyzed this new Trinity of Idealism in order to explain the ease with
which Idealists are able to adjust themselves to every new mode of thought. In this
respect Idealism resembles the Roman Church with its apparently inflexible character and
its infinite powers of adaptation. The very acosmic strain of Idealism, we have had
occasion to note, is an indication of antitheism. Similarly we can understand the reason
why Idealism is able to follow the empirical method completely in the field of the
philosophy and the history of religion. Idealism has really no absolute God, and,
therefore, need not take the matter of an absolute religion seriously. According to
Idealism, reality is inherently synthetic and it is therefore possible that totally new things
should arise. Accordingly, truth cannot be absolute, but must grow. In this respect the
difference between the Idealist and the Pragmatist seems to have disappeared completely.
If in the homeland there is still a certain aloofness, on the mission field the
representatives of Idealism and the representatives of Pragmatism have learned to work
as brothers side by side. And those whom they are seeking to convert are the theists who
still hold to the idol of an absolute God.
What seems to be in some respects a still further emphasis upon an ultimate plurality
appears in the philosophy of Lotze and more recently of James Ward and his followers.
We single out the philosophy of Ward for a brief discussion because it has the advantage
of being more recent. Moreover, as in the preceding section we had occasion while
discussing Webb to discuss also the question of the starting point of the schools of the
philosophy of religion, so in the case of Ward we can take a side glance at Idealist
psychology and observe that it too takes the antitheistic position for granted at the outset.
Finally, there is in Ward’s case once more an occasion to point out that what seems to be
theistic is often very antitheistic. In his book The Problem of Knowledge, D. C.
Macintosh discusses Ward’s position on the question of knowledge under a group of
writers which he designates as “Semi-pluralistic theistic idealism.” 9
9
 Op. cit., p. 183.
Speaking first of the psychology of Ward, inasmuch as it was in this field that Ward
has made his most original contribution to the field of modern thought, and since it is his
psychology that one must constantly keep in mind if one would understand his
epistemology, we note that the gist of the contribution made by Ward consists of a strong
emphasis on the contention that the subject and the object of knowledge and of
experience in general must never be thought of as having existed in separation from one
another. The subject-object relation, Ward holds, is present in every act of consciousness,
however low. Thus the old problem of Empiricism and Rationalism falls away as
artificial, he says.
Such an analysis might be understood in a thoroughly theistic sense. As far as the
form of Ward’s argument is concerned, we believe that he has expressed in modern
psychological terminology what has been expressed by the greatest of the theologians in
the church, because it is truly biblical. We have had occasion to remark that in the case of
Augustine and Calvin the God-consciousness of man was considered as being just as
fundamental as his self-consciousness. And in consonance with this position, we believe
it to be truly theistic to say that the consciousness of the subject and the object of
knowledge are equally original, even when the object of knowledge is not identified with
God but is identified with the sense world about us.
However, it is not in this theistic sense that we may interpret the psychology of Ward.
What he understands ordinarily by the object of knowledge is not God, either directly or
indirectly, either proximately or remotely, but is the world of “facts,” i.e., the finite
universe. Accordingly, he takes for granted that the whole knowledge transaction is
accomplished in the case of man’s knowledge of the so-called objective world, without
any reference to God at all. The ultimate bond of union between fact and law, between
particular and universal, is not furnished ultimately by God but is furnished by man.
Ward does not deem it necessary to refer to God at all in his discussion of the relation
between the subject and the object of knowledge. He takes for granted that if God is
going to have anything to do with the knowledge relation at all he can be summoned at
will and at a later date.
By speaking of consciousness per se, Ward does in the field of psychology what
Bosanquet does in the field of logic by speaking of thought per se. They assume that the
universe is as necessary for God as God is for the universe. And it is apparent that if God
is thought of as being nothing but a logical universal, the particulars will be as necessary
for his existence as he is for the existence of the particulars. Or again, if God is himself a
primus inter pares it is to be expected that he will be subject to the same limitations as his
brethren. Finally, if God is thought of as the Whole of reality, it goes without saying that
for him the subject-object relation is itself God.
Coming to Ward’s philosophy, we find that it corroborates our interpretation of his
psychology. Here too he starts without God. And he does this not surreptitiously but
intentionally. It is his very purpose to show that Idealism can start with the facts of life,
and from an investigation of them show that a God is needed for a final interpretation of
these facts. He therefore seems to be particularly theistic on two counts. In the first place
he seems to be theistic because he emphasizes, together with Pringle-Pattison and others,
the distinction between the personality of God and the personality of man. But in addition
to this he seems even to introduce the distinction which we have spoken of above
between a proximate and an ultimate starting point. He wants, he tells us, merely to start
with a pluralism in order to show that for any ultimate interpretations of reality we cannot
do without the conception of God. This makes it more necessary for us to examine
whether he has really lived up to this claim.
The first thing to note in this connection is that according to Ward, God has not
created man. In his book The Realm of Ends, Ward devotes a whole chapter to a
discussion of the concept of creation. In this chapter he gives the ordinary Idealistic
interpretation to the term creation. Creation, like causation, says Ward in effect, is a
category that cannot be applied to the whole of experience because it is a category that is
a part of experience. “If the categories of substance and cause are only valid within
experience they cannot be applied to experience as a whole. Whatever implications
experience may involve, it surely cannot involve that of transcending itself. Such
miscalled transcendence, if it have any validity, must really be immanence at bottom.” 10
It will be observed that in thus speaking uncritically of the term experience, Ward has
taken it to be axiomatic that God’s experience and man’s experience are to be taken as
species under the genus Experience, which includes both. In other words, Ward first
starts by including in the term Experience both divine and human experience, and then
argues that causality or creation must be an exclusively immanent action of God. It goes
without saying that if one first by definition includes the whole of reality within the one
term Experience, it is not possible thereafter to think of any transeunt action of God such
as creation is according to the theistic conception held to be. It is one thing to maintain
that every transeunt act of God must be thought of as presupposing a logically previous
immanent act of God, but it is quite another to take for granted that all the acts of God
must be exclusively immanentistic.
To say that all the action of God must be exclusively immanentistic, as Ward virtually
says, is only another way of saying that the plurality that logic needs or that epistemology
needs, is furnished by the facts of the spatial-temporal world. If they are said to be
created at all, they must be thought of as the ultimate source of difference in the Whole of
Reality. In other words, the position of Ward here agrees with that of Webb discussed
before, when he said that diversity cannot be furnished by the personalities of the Trinity
but must be furnished by the facts of the sense world. We have the same insistence in the
writings of both philosophers, and for that matter in many Idealist philosophers, that God
must be reduced to the abstract principle of unity in the universe. The so-called Concrete
Universal is not to be identified with the Trinity but is to be identified with God and the
universe, together called the Universe. Most clearly does this come out in Ward when he
tells us that, “If we attempt to conceive of God apart from the world there is nothing to
lead us on to creation.” 11 In reply we would say that such a God is exactly the kind of
God that we need, namely, one of whom we may think without thinking of him as
needing creation at all. Anything short of this puts the source of plurality beyond God and
ipso facto denies the absoluteness of God. But we are not now concerned to indicate how
this position of Ward’s leads to the destruction of experience as we believe that it does,
but we are concerned to observe that for Ward it is so axiomatic that any God that we are
to believe in must be thought of as necessarily creating this world, that he deems it the
climax of the process of reduction to absurdity when he has shown that a God who is
10
 Naturalism and Agnosticism, Vol. 2, p. 239.
11
 Realm of Ends, p. 309.
thought of apart from the world would not enable us to see why he has created the world
necessarily. Thus antitheism is taken for granted instead of proved.
But we are not limited to the necessity of deducing the conclusions from Ward’s
position in order to show his complete antitheism. He tells us in so many words that the
universe beyond God must be the source of plurality. He says, “In whatever sense you
say absolute, in that sense you cannot say many.” 12
Corresponding to the insistence on the part of Ward that God must be reduced to a
logical universal in the manifold of the universe, is his insistence that we start all our
investigations from the known world of plurality. He tells us that, “it is from the reality of
the world that we start.” 13 Or again, “We cannot begin from God and construct the
universe.” 14 Thus the so-called facts of the universe are taken not as a proximate but as
an ultimate starting point. This universe is thought of as having certain characteristics of
its own that are ascertainable by man apart from any reference to God. As in the case of
A. E. Taylor, who said that unless God knew the world as contingent he would simply be
deceived, because it is as a matter of fact contingent, so also Ward thinks it possible for
man to ascribe certain qualifications to the sense world and then say that God had better
fall in line with these qualifications. Nothing could be more flatly contradictory to a true
theism. In fact the contention of theism is that the facts of the universe owe their
existence to the predication or interpretation of them by God. Theologically, we express
this thought by saying that all things are made according to the counsel of God. In flat
contradiction to this, Ward says not only that the universe exists independently of God,
but that God must submit to its conditions. He says, “As immanent in this world, God
must, it would seem, so far be conceived as subject to its fundamental conditions.” 15
Ward plainly teaches that the conditions or laws or universals of the universe are above
God. God is to look up to them instead of determining them.
We conclude then that so far from being more theistic than others of his fellow
Idealists, Ward is, if possible, more antitheistic. One who starts with a pluralism of
Ward’s type will also end with a pluralism. It is not merely as a proximate, but decidedly
as an ultimate starting point that the human mind is taken. Macintosh suggested by the
title of his book that Ward’s position was semitheistic. We are forced to maintain that any
position that is semi-theistic is completely antitheistic. Ye cannot serve God and
Mammon.
We may in passing refer to the words of Hastings Rashdall and James Lindsay. Their
philosophy indicates again and with exceptional plainness that if one begins with the
assumption of the Idealist theory of judgment it is impossible to arrive at a theistic
position afterward.
Lindsay calls one of his main works A System of Theistic Idealism. In this work his
purpose is to tone down some of the extreme pantheism involved in the writings of such
men as T. H. Green, John and Edward Caird, Bradley and Bosanquet. He does this in
much the same way that Pringle-Pattison tried to do it, that is, by an emphasis upon the
human individual in opposition to the emphasis upon the Absolute. He says, “The
12
 Realm of Ends, p. 37.
13
 Realm of Ends, p. 245.
14
 Naturalism and Agnosticism, Vol. 2, p. 120.
15
 Realm of Ends, p. 194.
conception of Dr. Bosanquet does not tell us anything about the relation of the one real
Individual to man’s relative individuality, which is what philosophers want to know, nor
does it give us any serviceable conception of man’s individuality for this purpose.” 16 As
to Lindsay’s own philosophy, he holds that the relation between God and man is better
conceived of if it be first remembered that the sense world is to be thought of as a
creation of God’s will, and not merely of his nature. 17 Lindsay is very anxious to give his
philosophy a theistic color. In the same book, however, Lindsay tells us that he does not
want a God who is cosmically independent. Whatever he meant by the creation of the
world by the will of God must therefore be understood as operating within a Universe
that is larger than both God and man.
Christian theology contends that the whole of the meaning of history is that it
glorifies God, and that God has himself created the world for that purpose.
Philosophically we express this thought by saying that God is the ultimate subject of
every predicate. In opposition to this Lindsay says, “Theistic Idealism is too virile to be
troubled with the squeamishness sometimes evidenced by philosophers when nature is
viewed as in the old theological sense, as existent primarily for the glory of her Creator, a
view that freed the world from the ancient pagan dualism; for that Idealism is too
superior to anthropomorphism to think of Deity as a man that he should covet glory—He
to Whom nothing can be added.” 18 In this manner of stating the relation of God to
history, Lindsay has, with a toss of the hand, disposed of the whole theistic contention
with respect to God. If history does not exist exclusively for the glory of God, for what
then does it exist? The only reply that can be given is that it is self-contained, i.e., that it
exists for its own glory. It is very easy for anyone to point out the logical problem
involved in the theistic contention that God is self-sufficient, but that nevertheless history
has a genuine significance. However, merely to mention the difficulty and therewith to
throw overboard the whole theistic position as is done by Lindsay and by many other
Idealists, is, in effect, to take the whole antitheistic position for granted. For it is exactly
this that theism contends, namely, that the alternative to this view leads to a destruction
of predication altogether. The only alternative to holding that history adds to the glory of
the all-sufficient God is to say that it adds nothing to anything. What one does if he
rejects the theistic position with the lighthearted charge of anthropomorphism is to
assume that the human mind is the ultimate starting point of all predication. He then takes
for granted that “adding to” must be applied to God in exactly the same way that it is
applied to man. In other words, it assumes that all reality must be of one type, which is
just the question in dispute between theism and antitheism. It is only a particular
manifestation of the practice of Idealist writers to speak of Experience or of thought in
general without so much as asking whether one can thus include underived and derived
experience as species under one genus. The same sort of thing meets us when we see men
write books on the philosophy of religion and in them determine what kind of God they
can allow for by asking what the “religious consciousness” will tolerate. 19 Again, the
same thing meets us when men write books on morality and tell us what kind of God the
16
 Op. cit., p. 444.
17
 Op. cit., p. 24, 152, 154.
18
 Op. cit., p. 299.
19
 cf. Galloway, The Philosophy of Religion.
moral consciousness demands. 20 God certainly ought to consider himself very fortunate
if he can satisfy man’s religious or moral consciousness! So also God will have to adjust
himself to our intellectual consciousness and reduce himself to a correlative of the
universe if our textbook logic demands it, for fear that something worse may happen to
him. One cannot but wonder whether fundamentalist evangelists have altogether escaped
this antitheistic leaven when they ask some converts to testify whether Jesus has satisfied
them. We do not deem it unfair then to say that Lindsay with all his emphasis on a
theistic interpretation of Idealism has only demonstrated that no theistic interpretation can
be given to Idealism. His own position is once more built upon a gratuitous assumption of
the truth of antitheism.
What we have said with respect to Lindsay holds with equal force in the case of H.
Rashdall. He too reacts against the clearly pantheistic implications of the philosophy of
Bosanquet and other Idealists, and emphasizes the concept of the will of God as the
source of the sense world. 21 But as was the case with Lindsay, so it is the case with
Rashdall, that he conceives of abstract law as existing above both God and man. 22 This
once more reduces all the creative activity of the will of God to an exclusively
immanentistic action. Accordingly, Rashdall tells us that the moral consciousness of man
is ultimately responsible not to God, but to the moral law itself, and that this moral law is
somehow an aspect of the Universe as a whole. Thus it appears that here, too, not all
those who speak of the will of God as the source of creation can be classed as theists. The
moral consciousness of man is often taken for granted as being at the outset independent
of God.
We come now to brief discussion of Josiah Royce. In his various writings we have
another attempt to solve the difficult problem of the relation of the human self to its
environment. In fact, in his greatest work Royce undertakes a detailed discussion of this
most fundamental question. He has even given a name to this work that at once betrays
his absorption with our problem. The World and the Individual as a title tells us at once
that Royce seeks to give particular attention to the exact place of the self or the human
mind in the Universe and therefore in its relation to God. Again we find that as in the
case of Pringle-Pattison, Ward and others, so also in the case of Royce there is an attempt
to escape some of the pantheistic conclusions that seem to follow so inevitably from
absolute Idealism.
In The World and the Individual, Royce speaks of four conceptions of being:
Realism, Mysticism, Kant’s position, and finally his own, which is, generally speaking,
that of Hegelian Idealism. The first three conceptions of being are criticized as being
unsatisfactory because they are not inclusive enough. Any system of philosophy that
wishes to be satisfactory must have a principle of interpretation that is inclusive of the
whole of reality. Royce fears that some of his fellow Idealists have gone so far in
pressing the necessity of this whole that they have forgotten the equal necessity of
maintaining that the human individual is unique. Accordingly, he sets himself the same
problem that Pringle-Pattison set himself, that is, of seeing how it is possible to maintain
20
 cf., e.g., Newman Smyth, Christian Ethics.
21
 cf. The Religious Philosophy of Pringle Pattison, in Mind, N.S. 1918, p. 273.
Contentio Veritatis, p. 34. See also Good and Evil, 2 vol.
22
 Contentio Veritatis, pp. 38, 39.
the uniqueness of the self without taking it out of relation which makes the self possible.
He thinks he has found the solution of his problem by thinking of Reality as a self-
representative system.
Royce begins his argument in what would seem to be a most hopeful manner. Instead
of launching his opposition to the pantheizing tendency of some of the other Idealists by
emphasizing the ultimacy of the human personality as Pringle-Pattison and Ward had
done, he begins by showing that the Absolute itself must be personal. Self-consciousness
is the most central and important conception of theism. It might seem that Royce is
herewith putting us on the road to a genuine theism. Let us briefly hear his argument.
Bradley had maintained that selfhood is always and everywhere a self-contradictory
notion. Hence his conclusion had been that the Absolute must somehow be above the
contradiction of selfhood. This argument, we saw, was based upon the assumption that
the human categories are ultimate. What Bradley should have concluded from the
“contradictions” that he found in the conception of the self is not that God must be an
impersonal reality, but that he must be a higher, an absolute personality. Royce shows
that Bradley’s criticisms of the self do not justify him in rejecting the notion of selfhood
altogether. He says, “The Absolute, then, is above the Self, and above any form of mere
selfhood. The fact that it is thus above selfhood is something not other than experience;
but is wholly experience, and is the Absolute Experience itself. In fine then, the Absolute,
in Mr. Bradley’s view, knows itself so well—experiences so fully its own nature—that it
sees itself to be no self, but to be a self-absorber, ‘self-pervading’ to be sure, 23 and ‘self
existent,’ but aware of itself, in the end, as something in which there is no real self to be
aware of. Or, in other words, the Absolute is really aware of itself as being not Reality,
but Appearance, just in so far as is a Self.” 24
itFrom this quotation it would seem that Royce has defended the theistic notion of the
absolute self-consciousness of God. He can think of no reality behind the self-
consciousness of God. But the force of all this drops out when we observe that for Royce
the Absolute of which he speaks is not God in distinction from the universe, but is the
Universe including God. He speaks of Reality without making any distinction between
the reality of God and the reality of the universe. It is of this Whole that he says that it is
and must be a self-representative system. This is plain from his insistence that in the self-
representative system there must be an endless chain as well as unity. He says, “Hence it
is structure, at once One, as a single system, and also an endless Kette.” 25 Here Royce
shows that he conceives of the universe as being ultimate. We see in his thinking the
same phenomenon that we met with in the case of Bosanquet when he would at one time
insist that reality is essentially analytic, and at another time that reality is essentially
synthetic. In logical terms this position amounts to saying that God furnishes the identity
and the universe furnishes the difference, and so the Universe as a Whole contains
identity in difference and thus seems to meet the requirements of consistent concrete
interpretation.
When it comes to Royce’s conception of God he is, accordingly, placed before a trio
of options, one of which he must choose. He can identify God with the logical universal
23
 p. 552.
24
 The World and the Individual, 1, p. 552.
25
 Ibid., 1, p. 553.
in the Universe. He seems to do this when he wants to emphasize God’s transcendence
and speaks of him as Beyond and above our experience. Secondly, he may identify God
with one of the personalities in the Universe. Finally, he may and often does, identify
God with the Whole of Reality.
Royce was well aware of the fact that with his idea of an endless Kette he laid himself
open to the charge that he believed after all in a Pragmatic or open universe. Accordingly,
he labored much to make his idea of a self-representative system acceptable. One of the
ways in which he tried to do this was to show that in everyday experience we meet with
the idea of true infinity. In the number system, he says, the true nature of the series lies
not in its cardinal but in its ordinal aspect. True infinity lies not in endlessly following out
a series of cardinal numbers to the point of dizziness. It lies in the self-representative
power of the root. From such considerations as these Royce concludes, “Thus the nature
of the Real can be self-represented in endlessly various ways—and is capable of
embodiment—in as many different forms of selfhood, each individual as the nature of the
Absolute plan involves. So that our view of the Selfhood of the Absolute, if possible at
all, leaves room for various forms of individuality within the one Absolute; and we have
a new opening for a possible many in One—an opening whose value we shall have to test
in another way in our second series of lectures.” 26
From such an argument we learn that Royce tests the nature of reality by what the
finite mind can comprehend. For him the infinity of God is quite comparable to the
infinite concept of modern mathematics. This, a true theism is anxious to deny. God
whose infinity we can grasp as we can grasp—if we can grasp—the infinity of
mathematics cannot be more than a finite God because the modern mathematics concept
of infinity is the product of a finite mind.
What Royce is constantly trying to do is much the same thing that Plato tried to do,
that is, give us a membership in the eternal world itself. In order to do this Royce
distinguishes between the world of description and the world of appreciation. By the
world of description he means the world of law and order, the sense world of Plato or the
phenomenal world of Kant. By the world of appreciation he means the Ideal world of
Plato or the noumenal world of Kant. Of course Royce does not wish to separate these
worlds entirely. That would lead him into a dualism which he is most anxious to avoid.
He contends that the world of appreciation is the foundation of the world of description
and that we are members of both. As citizens of the heavenly realm of appreciation we
partake of the nature of the Absolute and are with him absolutely free and unique. “And
as a whole, the world of the self is caused by nothing, is what it is by virtue of its own
self-knowledge, is constituted by reflective self-consciousness in and for which it has its
own being. It is then through and through a world of Freedom; its own significance is
what occasions it thus to express itself. Nothing causes or explains it from without. It is
its own excuse for being.” 27
It appears clearly then that, according to Royce, the finite mind does not derive its
existence from God but is itself a member in a self-existent reality. This appears if
anything still more definitely in Royce’s detailed discussion about the uniqueness of
every personality. After trying to show that in his conception of the Universe as a whole
26
 Op. cit., 1, p. 546.
27
 The Spirit of Modern Philosophy, p. 418.
you are not a mere puppet, Royce says, “You are in God but you are not lost in God.” Or
again, “I alone amongst all the different beings of the universe, will this act.” 28 Similarly
he said in the first volume, “Here is a multiplicity that is not ‘absorbed’ or ‘Transmuted’
but retained by the Absolute. And it is a multiplicity of Individual facts that are still one
in the Absolute.” 29 According to Royce the freedom and the uniqueness of which he
speaks with respect to the human individual is something that is just as ultimate as the
freedom or the uniqueness of God. Even if Royce at the same time maintains that the
divine will also works in us at the time of our greatest uniqueness, that is at the most the
working of a logical universal in so many particulars. Flatly contradictory to this
conception of the relation of the divine working to the human individual is the conception
of Christian theism, which holds that in an Absolute sense all things that come to pass in
the universe, whether or not they take place by the action of human personality, are the
action of the counsel of God. Accordingly, every act of a finite personality is dependent
on an ultimate act of the completely self-conscious God. Man cannot be maintained to be
absolutely unique in relation to God. The whole question of man’s uniqueness has
meaning only if it be kept within the field of comparison with his fellow human beings.
It is interesting to take cognizance of the fact that when it comes to the question of the
ultimacy of human personality there are once more the two extremes of pantheism and
deism between which antitheistic thought is swinging back and forth. The only way in
which Royce seems to be able to avoid the pantheism of Bosanquet involved in the idea
that the individual is altogether transmuted when taken up into the Absolute, is to fall into
the deistic extreme of saying that man’s individuality can be maintained only if he be
considered as unique even over against the Absolute.
The conclusions of Royce have been based upon the mere assumption of the
correctness of antitheism. The whole assumption of the argument of Royce is that if man
cannot explain the relation of himself to God it cannot be explained at all. Thus it is taken
for granted that there can be no reality which is higher than temporal reality. In other
words, Royce, along with the others so far reviewed, has taken for granted that reality
must be interpreted in exclusively temporal categories.
A still more hopeful attempt to come to a really theistic interpretation of reality than
the one we have just been considering might seem to be that given us by Ernest Hocking
in his book The Meaning of God in Human Experience. We say “more hopeful,” because
the point that we have constantly been emphasizing is that in all these systems of
philosophy there was no real God-consciousness to begin with, and therefore there was
no God-consciousness at the end. In the case of Hocking we find a man who seems to
emphasize this very necessity of an original God-consciousness. He tells us that the
human self taken by itself is an “irrelevant universal.” This is exactly the point we have
been trying to make. Our very contention has been that the human self cannot function in
any capacity until it is seen as in contact with God. So also Hocking says, “Evil becomes
a problem only because the consciousness of the Absolute is there: apart from this fact
the colour of evil would be mere contents of experience.” 30 Thus Hocking points out that
for us to ask any intelligent question about reality presupposes the idea of an Absolute.
28
 The World and the Individual, 2, p. 460 ff.
29
 The World and the Individual, 1, p. 554.
30
 Op. cit., p. 103.
Many others were willing to admit that for the final answers to questions it is necessary at
the last to introduce the idea of God, but Hocking has gone back of this and has said that
even to begin to ask an intelligent question we must presuppose an Absolute.
Putting it in another way, Hocking tells us that no God is found at the level of ideas
that is not already found at the level of sensation. 31 Or again, “The whole tale of
Descartes’ discovery is not told in the proposition, I exist, knowing. It is rather told in the
proposition, I exist, knowing the Absolute, or I exist knowing God.” 32 It would seem
then that in the case of Hocking the God-consciousness has been made genuinely
fundamental and that there is nothing of which any theist might wish to complain.
Yet we must complain. We hold that, after all, Hocking has not made the God-
consciousness fundamental. In the case of Bosanquet we saw that he insisted that there
must be absolute system. We observed his acosmic tendency. We interpreted it as
idolatry. Now the insistence of Hocking that the God-consciousness be made
fundamental can be taken at face value only if there is no equally fundamental insistence
on the originality of the human self-consciousness. But such is exactly the case. Hocking
is anxious to be quite empirical in his method of investigation of the religious
consciousness. In this respect we have once more an instance similar to that of Webb who
started out with a strong Idealistic demand and soon lost himself in complete Empiricism.
So also Hocking’s position has been called an “Empirical Development of Absolutism.”
33
 Hocking’s Empiricism appears when he describes the origin of the religious
consciousness. On this question he takes the ordinary evolutionary view. He tells us that
early in life one has to face the grim reality that has produced us and that seems to
overwhelm us. Immediately we sense our rights, and “The God-idea thus appears as a
postulate of our moral consciousness; an original object of resolve that tends to make
itself good in experience.” 34 We see then that, after all there is a time, according to
Hocking, when the moral consciousness functions independently of God. And that time is
at the very start. The moral consciousness starts by asserting its rights in a hostile
universe and quickly gasps for God. But this is exactly what theism can never allow. It
does not help in the least that one brings the God-consciousness down very low, unless it
is made basic to the very first act of the human consciousness, whether that be in the field
of morals or in the field of knowledge proper. We must conclude then that the whole of
the philosophy of Hocking and that of his fellow Idealists is not only built upon an
irrelevant universal, but that it is simply taken for granted that this irrelevant universal is
the only basis upon which any philosophy can be constructed.
There are, of course, many more modern philosophers that might be discussed. Our
purpose was not to give anything like a complete survey, but to give a few samples of
what one can find in a general survey of modern antitheistic thought. We have taken
these samples from a variety of currents of modern thought, but chiefly from the Idealist
tradition because it is there that the substitution of a genuine for a false theism is most
easily made. If even such men as Hocking and Royce have begun their philosophical
31
 Op. cit., p. 201.
32
 Op. cit., p. 201.
33
 D. C. Macintosh in Phil. Rev., 1914, p. 17 ff.
34
 Op. cit., p. 147.
speculation upon the basis of one grand assumption of the truth of the antitheistic
position, this is certainly true of all the various schools of Pragmatists and Realists.
Chapter 13:
The Starting Point Of Christian Theistic
Epistemology:
D: The Subject Of Knowledge: Idealism And
Christianity
In the two preceding chapters we have attempted to show that the opponents of
Christian theism have, when discussing the question of theism, taken the antitheistic
viewpoint for granted at the outset of their argument. In this chapter, we shall attempt to
show that when the more particular question of Christianity is up for discussion we meet
once more with the same phenomenon. Here too the anti-Christian position is taken for
granted instead of proved. And it will be specially important to note that those who have
rejected theism invariably also reject Christianity, and that those who reject Christianity
invariably reject theism. In other words, men reject Christian theism no matter whether
they begin with the theistic or with the Christian aspect of that system of thought.
What we shall do in this chapter is to discuss briefly the philosophy of A. E. Taylor in
order to show that because he takes the antitheistic position for granted he must also take
the anti-Christian position for granted. We shall also take the philosophy of Borden P.
Bowne in order to show that because he takes the anti-Christian position for granted he
must also take the antitheistic position for granted. The reason for arranging the argument
in this way is not that these men have always reasoned exclusively in this way, i.e.,
Taylor always from antitheism to anti-Christianity and Bowne always from anti-
Christianity to antitheism. As a matter of fact, they have not. But this does not matter. We
might just as well have turned their names about. We are using them merely as
illustrations. The one method of approach may serve to establish the validity of the other.
Yet there is an appropriateness in choosing these names and in using them in the way
indicated. It goes without saying that we could not well take a Pragmatist in order to
show that a rejection of theism involves a rejection of Christianity, or that a rejection of
Christianity involves the rejection of theism. Pragmatists have, as a rule, thought it
beneath their dignity to discuss Christianity at all. This is in itself an indication that he
who is most outspoken in the rejection of theism is also most outspoken in his rejection
of Christianity. Yet we are then handicapped because there is no concrete evidence by
which we can go. So, for example, the writings of Professor R. W. Sellars indicate that
the author deems Christianity’s claim about itself worthy of no more serious attention
than merely to weave Christianity into the evolutionary process. 1 In a somewhat similar
way extreme Idealists dispose of Christianity. Hegel took all the concepts of Christianity
such as creation and incarnation, and with a high hand changed their connotation and
proceeded to weave them into the dialectic of his philosophical Absolute. In the same
way, later Idealists have carelessly tossed Christianity overboard. Some of them, to be
sure, when they were in their acosmic strain have spoken of the Supernatural and the
Beyond, but as indicated above, even in that case they had changed the connotation of
1
 cf. Evolutionary Naturalism.
these terms beyond recognition before they were willing to use them. On the other hand,
when less anxious to keep up appearances, they have cast off the shackles of Christianity
altogether. As an interesting illustration, we may mention the writings of J. Watson. He
has fearlessly criticized Bosanquet when the latter thought it possible to retain the
conception of the Beyond in any non-temporal sense. Watson has shown that the most
fundamental demand of Bosanquet’s own theory of judgment is that there is no Beyond.
The reason for this is, says Watson, that Bosanquet has all the while tacitly assumed and
has never openly denied that human thought is absolute in principle if not in degree. We
have called attention to this at various times by saying that Bosanquet speaks merely of
“thought” as such, without distinguishing between divine and human thought. If one
holds to the Idealist conception of the judgment, one must give up the idea of a God who
is Beyond except in a quantitative sense. 2 Accordingly, when Watson turns to a more
direct discussion of Christianity, he does not hesitate to trim all the conceptions of
Christianity till they fit into his Idealistic scheme of reality which can allow for no
transcendent God. 3 It is for this reason that we turn to those who are regarded as theists
in a general sense and who have openly advocated a theism in opposition to Idealism. A
special advantage of choosing Bowne is that he may perhaps be called the father of
Personalism in America. Many ministers have thought that they could find in his
philosophy a sound metaphysical basis for their Christian thought.
Before we enter upon the argument proper, it is necessary to bring out in a general
way what the issue is when the matter of Christianity is discussed in relation to the
subject of knowledge.
When discussing the object of knowledge we saw that the bone of contention between
Christian theists and their opponents was, in the first place, whether the existence of the
object of knowledge may be taken for granted apart from God. In the second place, we
saw that the question was whether the object of knowledge can be interpreted aright apart
from the interpretation of God, which in a sinful world must come through the Christ of
the Scriptures.
When discussing the subject of knowledge in its theistic rather than in its Christian
aspect, we saw that the main question was once more whether the existence of the subject
of knowledge could be taken for granted apart from God, and therefore whether the
human subject may be taken for granted as an ultimate starting point of knowledge.
Discussing now the question of the subject of knowledge from its more specifically
Christian aspect, the question is more particularly that of Error. Christian theism holds
that error is the result of sin. This is to be taken in a general sense. It does not mean that
every mistake someone makes in logic is directly traceable to some sin. But it does mean
that sin is the source of all evil and therefore of all error in the world. This the “natural
man” cannot allow. He has grown so accustomed to the abnormal condition of sin that he
actually thinks it is the normal condition. He violently resents the suggestion that his
mind is not normal. The condition of the “natural man” is illustrated by the well-known
story of the country of the blind. The inhabitants of this country were so accustomed to
their blind condition that when someone came to them who could see, they thought that
he was a wild visionary. It is this idea that accounts for the fact discussed in the preceding
2
 Phil. Rev., 1895, p. 353 ff.; pp. 485 ff.; and Phil. Rev., V. 34, p. 440.
3
 cf. Christianity and Idealism and Interpretation of Religious Experience.
chapters, namely, that antitheistic thinking takes its position for granted. It is this that
accounts for the fact that when the “natural mind” turns to examine the phenomena of
“regeneration” it takes for granted that it can be explained in naturalistic categories. We
see this clearly in James’ Varieties of Religious Experience. It is there taken for granted
that the object of knowledge can be adequately known, if known at all, without the light
of the Scripture.
We cannot now work out the details of the conception of regeneration as far as
epistemology is concerned. Nor is this necessary. All that we are here concerned about is
that we shall have clearly in mind that the concepts of an absolute God, an absolute Bible,
and absolute regeneration go together. The concept of absolute Scripture as a necessity
for the illumination of the object of knowledge and of the subject of knowledge go
together. It should be noted particularly that if theism is true, that is, if man’s knowledge
must, in the nature of the case, be reinterpretation of God’s interpretation, it also follows
that only by absolute measures could man who had by sin denied his reinterpretative
position, be brought back again. We shall have occasion soon to meet some of the
criticisms that are launched against this position. We may turn now to a discussion of
Taylor’s position in order to show that his rejection of theism inevitably leads to his
rejection of Christianity.
We take for our text the recent Gifford lectures of A. E. Taylor, a two volume work
entitled The Faith of a Moralist, already referred to. In the first volume the author
discusses more directly theistic questions, and in the second volume he discusses
questions that pertain more directly to Christianity. In the first volume he has a chapter,
“Eternity and Temporality.” It is here that we must look first in order to learn our
author’s conception of the relation of God to man.
In this chapter Taylor attaches his reflections to the discussion Plato gives in The
Timaeus on the relation of the eternal and the temporal. According to Plato, the “world
soul,” by which he means the physical universe, is made up of two ingredients, namely,
“the same” and “the other.” They are, says Taylor, “just object and event, the eternal and
the temporal.” 4 Taylor holds it to be a fact from which we may begin our reasoning
process that this Platonic concept of the relation of the eternal and the temporal is
essentially true. He says, “As morality becomes conscious of itself, it is discovered to be
always a life of tension between the temporal and the eternal, only possible to a being
who is neither simply eternal and abiding, nor simply mutable and temporal, but both at
once. The task of living rightly and worthily is just the task of the progressive
transmutation of a self which is at first all but wholly mutable, at the mercy of all the
gusts of circumstance and impulse, into one which is relatively lifted above change and
mutability, or, we might say, as an alternative formula, it is the task of the thorough
transfiguration of our interests, the shifting of interest from temporal to non-temporal
good.” 5
In this quotation we have the gist of the matter. We observe three things with regard
to it. In the first place Taylor takes it to be a fact that morality is a struggle between the
eternal and the temporal in us. About this matter he thinks there can be no dispute. Yet it
is exactly this that is in dispute between the theists and non-theists. There is no inherent
4
 1, p. 69.
5
 Vol. 1, p. 70.
logical reason why the theism that comes to expression in the Scripture when it says that
original man was a Wholly temporal being with no aspirations whatsoever to become
eternal, but with the truly temporal aspirations to do the will of the eternal God, should be
considered to be so absurd as not to require refutation. Original man may be conceived as
being truly interested in “eternal good” if he seeks to live according to it as a standard
which has been given to him. At the same time he could be interested in temporal things.
Why should the temporal be thought of as necessarily the source of evil? If the God of
Scripture has created it, the temporal is inherently good, and man could seek God in the
temporal. According to theism, there was no tension originally between the eternal and
the temporal. We hold that the reason for seeking the tension here is that men do not want
the tension to be found in the exclusively ethical sphere. If the tension can be reduced to
something metaphysical, its seriousness is reduced or taken away and man is no longer
responsible for it. For this reason it is but to be expected that the “unregenerated
consciousness” shall seek to find the very nature of morality to be a strife between the
temporal and the eternal in man.
In the second place, we must observe that the whole antitheistic position is involved
in Taylor’s assumption that the nature of morality consists in a tension between the
eternal and the temporal. Theism holds that there is no being and can be no being who is
a mixture of the ingredients of eternity and temporality. God is eternal and man is
temporal, and not even Christ is a mixture of the two. In the incarnation, the church has
been anxious to maintain, Christ’s personality remained divine; it was the human nature,
not the human person that he assumed.
In the third place, the truth of the anti-Christian position is taken for granted.
According to Christianity, the redemption wrought by God is not that of the eternization
of man but his restoration and perfection in the temporal sphere. Even the conception of
“eternal life” as it is spoken of, especially by the Apostle John, does not in the least blur
or annihilate the distinction between the eternity of God and the temporality of man. By
eternal life the New Testament means a continuation of man’s temporal existence in a
perfect ethical state, while the conception of eternity when applied to God has nothing to
do with time. Only God is and remains supra-temporal.
The antitheistic nature of Taylor’s thought appears still further in this conception of
morality as the attempt of the temporal to outgrow itself. Taylor thinks that the whole of
the temporal is surrounded by an essentially unknown ocean. On this point Taylor has
linked his thought to that of T. H. Green who maintained, as Taylor paraphrases it, “that
in all moral progress to a better, the driving force is aspiration after a best, of which we
can say little more at any stage of the process, than that it lies ahead of us on the same
line of advance along which the already achieved progress ... ” 6 In contrast to this,
theism holds that the absolute moral ideal is known to God because laid down by God.
Hence also the absolute moral ideal was originally known by man because man, being
created in the image of God, was by virtue of that fact in possession of the truth in every
respect. Moreover, in paradise God spoke to man and indicated to him the nature of his
task in relation to the world. Man, to be sure, did not and could not and therefore will not
fathom the depth of the eternity of God. But it is not necessary to maintain that man did
or can or will fathom God in order to maintain that he was in possession of the absolute
6
 Vol. 1, p. 71.
truth in the moral sphere. Only the assumption of the Idealistic notion that all reality must
be essentially perspicuous to man as well as to God, in other words, only upon the
assumption of the essential correlativity of God and man, can one hold that the ethical
ideal must, in the nature of the case, always be in the vague and distant future. Idealism
finds itself forced to hold, on the one hand, to the essential perspicuity of reality to the
mind of man, because it has started out by assuming that the human and the divine minds
are on the same plane. On the other hand, Idealism must hold that there is a vague
unknown for God as well as for man, because it has taken for granted that the limitations
which are in the human mind, inasmuch as it is temporal, are also in the divine mind. The
contention of theism in this connection is that no one would be certain that there would
be any “Line of Advance” at all, unless there were the certainty of the absolute self-
consciousness of God. Hence it will not do for any writer merely to take for granted that
there is this vague unknown in the distance, and that there is the definitely known apart
from God in the present.
When Taylor discusses The Meaning and Place of Authority, he tells us that the basic
reason for the rejection of the conception of absolute biblical authority is that Christianity
deals with historical phenomena and that it is always impossible to transmit the exact
meaning of any historical phenomenon. He says, “In any true account of the concrete and
individual reality one must somewhere come upon something of which it can only be
said, ‘Why this thing should be so, or even just what it is, is more than I can tell, but at all
costs it must be recognized that here the thing is.’ If this is all we mean by ‘irrationality,’
we may safely say that historical individuality is the great supreme irrational from which
thought can never succeed in getting free.” 7 Taylor takes for granted that historical
reality exists in independence of God. If God was to know the temporal universe at all, he
must know it as existing independently. Each bit of concrete historical reality is
independent of the rationality of God. In contrast to this, theism maintains that every bit
of historical reality is what it is because of the prior rationality of God. Taylor again
makes the mistake of identifying “irrationality” for us with irrationality for God.
And this brings us to the most pivotal question of the relation of the constructive
activity of the human mind in relation to historical fact. The burden of all the arguments
against the conception of revelation is that it always requires a subjective element. Taylor
tells us that it is impossible to make any intelligible statement “whether about the natural
or the supernatural, which shall have as its content the simply objective and given, with
no element whatever of the subjective and constructed.” 8 In order to clinch this argument
completely, he introduces the question of the authority of our Lord. He points to the
church’s belief that the soul and the body of Christ are “in the fullest sense of the word,”
creatures. Still further he reminds us that Christ did many things that are done by
creatures only; Christ grew in wisdom and grace with God and man; Christ prayed and
felt forsaken. Accordingly, Taylor concludes that, “when a Christian speaks of the
adequacy of the Lord’s human experience of the supernatural, he must not, I take it,
forget that the adequacy meant is still relative to the conditions of creatureliness
inseparable from genuine humanity.” 9 That Taylor himself considers this to be the basis
7
 Vol. 2, p. 212.
8
 Vol. 2, p. 229.
9
 Vol. 2, p. 230.
of all his objections to the orthodox conception of revelation is plain from the fact that
after giving several of the arguments that are usually brought forward in favor of and
against the conception of absolute authority he says, “But the point on which I am
personally most concerned to insist is a different one. It is that in immediate apprehension
of the supernatural, as in immediate apprehension of the natural, we are dealing with
concrete, individual, historical, experiences which resist complete intellectual analysis, at
the same time that they demand it. In both cases, no man can communicate what he sees
in its totality and individuality.” 10
It ought to be apparent from the great emphasis Taylor himself lays upon this point
and the momentous conclusions that follow if his point is granted, that we must be very
careful here to note the exact implications of his thought. According to Taylor, the object
of knowledge is assumed to exist apart from God. In consonance with this and in
correspondence with this, Taylor now insists that the subject of knowledge also exists
apart from God and that it does its interpretative activity in total independence of God.
Taylor takes for granted that man is an ultimate interpreter instead of a derived
reinterpreter. He tells us that if there is any interpretative element entering into the
reception of the meaning of any objective reality it has therewith lost its absoluteness. He
tells us that the interpretative element is subjective. It prevents us from coming into
contact with the absolutely given. Here, exactly, theism takes issue. Theism holds that
truth, although interpreted and reinterpreted by man, is absolute. According to theism,
there is no absolutely given for God either beyond or within God’s nature. It goes without
saying that the biblical conception of the absolute self-consciousness of God is flatly
opposed to any such idea. An attempt to introduce the “given” into the bosom of the
Godhead is nothing less than to introduce the pagan notion of an original evil universe
into Christian thought. For God the object and the subject of knowledge are identical as
far as his own person is concerned. We have seen above that there can be no conception
of a vague irrationality enveloping the historical for God. For God history has no surd.
But for the same reason human thought must in the nature of the case be reinterpretative.
When the human being thinks normally, his interpretation does not introduce an element
of subjectivity which vitiates the absoluteness of the truth with which he comes into
contact. On the contrary, when man thinks normally he must be in contact with absolute
truth. His mind cannot do anything but think God’s thoughts after him, and God’s
thoughts are always absolute. Of course it should be noted that man’s thought need not be
as comprehensive as God’s thought in order to be said to be absolutely true. Taylor has
assumed that such must be the case.
On a theistic basis there is no such distinction between an absolutely given for God as
Taylor holds that there is. The recreative or reinterpretative activity of the human subject
of knowledge does no damage to the absoluteness of the truth with which it comes into
contact. In another connection we have called attention to the fact that antitheistic thought
takes for granted that for any act to be truly personal it must be unipersonal. That is, any
personal action must be surrounded by a completely impersonal universe. Even the most
personalistic of antitheistic philosophies such as that of Borden F. Bowne, make this
mistake. But theism holds that every finite person is surrounded by a completely
personalistic atmosphere. Even if the world immediately around him be “impersonal,”
10
 Vol. 2, p. 224.
this impersonal world derives its meaning from its Creator. Taylor takes for granted that
any interpretation must be ultimate interpretation, so that if man gives any interpretation
it can be no longer said that God has given ultimate interpretation. Taylor holds that if
man inserts any interpretative element the whole matter of interpretations becomes
insofar a cooperative affair between God and man. In contrast to this, theism holds that
God’s ultimate interpretation and man’s finite reinterpretation cannot clash. Man’s
reinterpretation could not function except for God’s prior and absolute interpretation.
If we keep this great difference between theism and the position of Taylor in mind we
shall be clear in our minds as to what to answer to the various detailed objections that
Taylor brings against the orthodox conception of Christianity. These objections center to
a large extent upon the conception of absolute authority. Taylor thinks that he had found
the really natural and truly scientific attitude to the whole question of authority by saying
that religious authority should not be taken in the old sense of being absolute. Religious
authority is the authority of the expert. Jesus was the greatest religious expert that ever
lived. Accordingly, we ought to attach great weight to his words. Yet, as noted above, we
should always be sensible to the fact that his experience of the supernatural was to an
extent subjective and constructive, and to that extent is not absolute. Then, naturally, if
this position is taken with respect to Jesus it is but to be expected that the Bible will fare
no better. In the case of the Bible it is much easier than in the case of Christ to make the
theory of expert authority seem reasonable, because the Bible has come to us through
many mediaries and requires interpretation over and over again. With respect to the
Bible, Taylor brings forth the usual objections such as that the text is corrupt, that there
are ambiguous statements, that there are known errors, that even if all this were not so
and there were not many and various interpretations of the one authority, the question
would still be as to which Bible would have to be accepted. He says, “Moreover, before
we can so much as know what Bible it is to which we are appealing since the Bible itself
never enumerates its own component parts, we have to go to an extra-Biblical authority
to learn what ‘books’ are part of the infallible Bible, and what are not. (So far the
‘Fundamentalists’ apparently have shirked the question what is the authority which fixes
the canon of Scripture, but it is a question which they must be prepared to face—with
curious consequences for Fundamentalism.)” 11
We see from the enumeration of these various objections that the one foundation of
them all is that which we have discussed above, namely, that according to Taylor there
can be no authority which is absolute if the one who receives the message of authority is
in any way “constructive,” i.e., interpretatively active, in the reception of it. He holds that
for absolute authority to exist at all one must first think of experience as standing in sharp
metaphysical opposition to it. Accordingly, he represents his own view as overcoming
this antithesis. He says, “Or to put it rather differently, what I would suggest is that
authority and experience do not stand over against one another in sharp and irreconcilable
opposition; authority is the self assertion of the reality of an experience which contains
more than any individual experient has succeeded in analyzing out and extricating for
himself.” 12
11
 Vol. 2, p. 209.
12
 Vol. 2, p. 214.
We have already observed how it is Taylor and not the biblical theist who has set up a
false antithesis to begin with. It was he who set up the interpretative activity of the human
mind as something independent of the interpretative activity of the divine mind. And if
one starts with such a false assumption it is but to be expected that one cannot think of
the absolute authority of God over man unless man’s mental activity be put to a complete
standstill. On the other hand the theistic conception which underlies and forms the
foundation of the conception of absolute biblical authority does not entertain a false
antithesis to begin with. The very foundation of the concept of biblical authority is that
because of God’s absolute self-consciousness man’s self-conscious activity is always
derivative and man’s constructive activity operates in the field of God’s original
constructive activity. Hence absolute authority was man’s daily meat and drink when his
mind was normal. It was only because of the entrance of sin in the heart of man that it
was necessary for this authority of God to come to man in an externally mediated form.
But this externally mediated form was necessary because of an ethical and not because of
a metaphysical separation between God and man. Accordingly it was necessary that the
ethical alienation should be removed in order that the original metaphysical relation
should be able to function normally again.
In our defense of the concept of biblical authority, then, it is of the utmost importance
that it be brought into relationship with the theistic position that is presupposed by it. So
much the argument of Taylor should clearly teach us. It is not till we have shown that the
antitheistic assumption of Taylor of an original metaphysical independence of man from
God is the source of all the opposition of the idea of biblical authority that we have dealt
with these objections in a thorough way. This does not mean that it is of no value to show
that particular objections themselves in each case rest upon misunderstanding. But it does
mean that the deepest misunderstanding upon which all the objections rest is that of the
assumed correlativity of God and man with which antitheistic thought starts upon its way.
It is true, in part at least, that Fundamentalism has not always been conscious of this fact.
It has sometimes limited its activities to a statement and defense of details without
bringing these details into relation with the big issues of metaphysics and epistemology
underlying them. But if Taylor’s criticism is in a measure justified when we think of
Fundamentalism, it is not justified when the historic confessions are taken into
consideration. In these confessions the doctrine of biblical authority is not separated from
the theistic interpretation of reality. The whole argument about biblical authority would
be given a better setting if on the side of the orthodox it were constantly realized that we
cannot defend Christianity without in the same breath defending theism, and if on the
side of the opponents of Christianity it were realized that in dispensing with Christianity
they must also be prepared to sacrifice theism. The orthodox will not see the proper
relation between the biblical concept of authority in particular and Christianity in general
to the position of theism as a whole, as long as they themselves entertain any of the
essentially antitheistic notions about the independence of human thought.
We saw in our historical survey that Lutheran and Arminian epistemology to an
extent harbored the false metaphysical dualism that we have now discovered to be the
source of the most refined form of opposition to the conception of biblical authority.
Hence it is all the more imperative that we realize with ever increasing vividness that it is
only an ethical and not a metaphysical situation that makes Scripture necessary. If one
begins as, e.g., J. Watson does in his Theological Institute by allowing to man some
original interpretative powers as a created being, it is difficult to see how one could
afterward attempt to answer the objections of the sort that Taylor has been bringing out.
If man is given any original interpretative power to begin with, that is, if man can, in any
sense, come into contact with any object of knowledge apart from God, that power can
never be taken from him, and if any special revelation should later come to man, it could
never be absolute because the interpretative element that man would himself contribute
would always introduce the independently contingent.
If one attempts to defend the idea of absolute biblical revelation while he himself
stands upon a semi-theistic basis, one will naturally begin to yield to the antitheistic idea
that “experience” is the test of truth, without asking what is meant by experience. We can
see this in the fact that many good conservative men toy with the words of Coleridge,
“The Bible finds men.” This statement may be interpreted theistically, and it may be
interpreted antitheistically. As it stands, it is ambiguous. The form of the statement would
make one think that the origination has been on the side of God. And if it is interpreted in
this way it is of course theistic. However, what Coleridge meant, and what many after
him have meant by the phrase, is that the origination lies with man. Man is thought of as
the one who must ultimately judge as to what is spiritually most satisfactory for him, and
it is this contention that makes the statement ordinarily dangerously antitheistic. It should
be clearly understood that if one is to use the phrase in a theistic sense the “me” or the
“experient” must be thought of as one who has already been transformed. In other words,
only the regenerate can really say that the Bible finds them. To the non-regenerate there
is nothing so obnoxious as the surrender the Bible demands of them. If the non-
regenerate say that the Bible finds them, it is certain that they have first taken out of the
Bible that which makes the Bible what it is, namely, the demand of absolute ethical
surrender with which it approaches the “natural man.” Coleridge’s conception comes out
of the antitheistic background which thinks God is a symbol, and which reduces Christ to
a theologian, as Taylor does also, and reduces the Bible to expert religious opinion.
We may be saved from all this confusion by paying diligent regard to the antitheistic
assumption that underlies the objections to biblical authority. If we do this carefully we
shall recognize that the complete ethical surrender which the Bible demands of sinful
“experience” is possible only because there is no underlying metaphysical separation
between God and man. One who holds to an original metaphysical independence of man
cannot afterward think of any complete ethical alienation between God and man. Daily
experience can teach us this lesson. Only where an original close relation exists is it
possible for strong ethical alienation to appear. A divorce is the bitterest alienation among
human beings. At least it was. And only because marriages are no longer “made in
heaven” is it that divorce has lost its bitter sting. So also if I am originally a creature
totally dependent upon God and if I then sin against him, the ethical surrender is possible
and imperative if man is to be saved. On the other hand, if I am to begin with a semi-
independent being, it is much my own business what I want to do, and though God may
have some claim on me and be of a different opinion than I on the question of obedience
to him, he cannot demand from me a complete ethical surrender.
Summing up what we may learn from an argument such as that developed by Taylor,
we find that the ordinary objections to the idea of an absolute biblical authority have as
their foundation an assumed antitheistic metaphysic. If one begins by assuming that bare
possibility is the matrix from which time reality has somehow sprung, it is but natural
that one cannot allow for absolute authority, because in that case there is no absolute
God. We are aware of the fact that Taylor would not admit that he begins with the
assumption of bare possibility as the most ultimate metaphysical category. In his article
“Theism,” in Hastings’ Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, he definitely tells us that we
must either accept the priority of the actual over the potential or be ready to assert that
you can intelligibly conceive of the possible non-existence of any reality whatsoever. 13
Yet this contention is no more than another indication of the acosmic tendency that we
found to be prevalent among Idealist thinkers. The conception of the historical as
something independent of God is inconsistent with the idea of the priority of the actual
over the potential. It is no wonder then that we notice Taylor slowly giving up his idea of
God as pure actuality. In the work we have been considering, God is clearly portrayed as
dependent upon the universe.
We now reverse this argument and show from the philosophy of B. P. Bowne that if
one begins by reasoning against orthodox Christianity one cannot stop till one has also
reasoned against theism.
In his book Studies in Christianity, Bowne begins with a discussion of The Christian
Revelation. He plunges at once into an enumeration of the difficulties connected with the
old theories of the Scriptures as an infallible book. His purpose throughout is to rid
Christianity of some of the extreme and unreasonable theories such as plenary
inspiration, in order to show that there remains a genuine sense in which we may still
speak of a Christian revelation. Bowne entertains the common liberal idea that the moral
consciousness of man as he is can be taken as the standard of ethical and religious truth.
Bowne’s first conclusion with respect to the Bible is that “The Christian revelation,
then, is not the Bible, though it is in the Bible.” 14 Bowne has here clearly made the
choice for the consciousness of man as the standard by which the Scriptures are to be
judged. If it be asked what is the standard of the moral consciousness to be, Bowne, as is
usual with liberal writers, appeals to the person of Jesus. But this clearly does not help,
because we know nothing of Jesus except through the Bible, while if we take the Bible
testimony with respect to Jesus we have a Jesus who demands absolute surrender of the
moral consciousness to God, to himself, and to the Apostles who spoke in his name, so
that we are back again at the place from which we started. If the consciousness of man is
taken as the judge of Scripture instead of the Scripture as the judge of the consciousness
of man, there is nothing but to go to the limit with this line of reasoning and reduce Christ
to a human person and God to a correlative of man. It is this that we see happening in the
writings of Bowne. Let us note briefly how Bowne proceeds on this downward path.
Speaking of the heathen he says, “They do not need the Bible considered as a book.
They need the Christian way of thinking about God and his purposes concerning man;
and they need the Bible only as it helps them to this view.” 15 But this is all the heathen
ifneed, there must be someone to interpret to them what the Bible teaches about the
Christian way of thinking about God. And this interpreter must, of course, be a liberal.
Bowne says, “If the Hindu mind could be swept clean or, all its religious conceptions and
their place taken by the ideas of the Lord’s Prayer and the Sermon on the Mount, it would
13
 p. 278.
14
 Op. cit., p. 7.
15
 p. 10.
be for India a blessing great beyond all comparison.” 16 By this sort of limitation Bowne
thinks he has saved the pagan mind from contact with the artificial and wholly
unnecessary notion of the forensic conceptions that Paul entertains about the
righteousness of Christ. He thinks the matter has then been lifted to a truly ethical plane.
We are adducing this matter here for no other immediate purpose than to indicate that
the moral consciousness is waxing more and more independent of the Scripture as it
learns to take out of it what it likes, and to leave what it doesn’t like. And it begins to
appear pretty definitely what it does not like. It does not like anything in the Bible that
speaks explicitly of the necessity of complete ethical self-surrender to Christ and the
Scripture as an absolute authority.
It does not take very long before the figure of God begins to appear in a different
light. The first glimpses that we get of the new God is that he is “The Almighty Friend
and Lover of Men, the Chief of Burden-bearers, and the Leader of all in self-sacrifice.” 17
Thus in the first 25 pages it already appears what Bowne himself regards as involved in
the rejection of complete biblical authority. It involves the rejection of the atonement.
Man is not a sinner against his Creator, but an unfortunate and helpless creature in an evil
universe. It involves secondly the conception of Christ as the wisest of maxim makers
instead of as the only begotten of the Father. All that man needs is some advice, and
Jesus amply furnishes that. It involves the notion of the finite God who is in a Universe
that is greater than both himself and man. Such a God will not call his rational creatures
to an account for their sins. They have not really sinned against him. Instead he sets a
marvelous example of doing all he can to help others. As the royal monarch he is the first
to aid the great drive to relieve the depression that has somewhat fallen upon the
universe.
In these few pages then we already find the whole of the quick descent to chaos once
the conception of Bible authority is thrown overboard. Per aspera ad astra was no doubt
Bowne’s motto, but Facilis Descensus ad Averno has been the result of his effort to
improve upon the consistent Christian theistic conception of authority.
Bowne warns against setting up any a priori doctrine of inspiration. “What
inspiration is must be learned from what it does. We have no a priori conception of
inspiration from which we can infer its essential nature.” 18 This statement is in line with
Bowne’s constant emphasis upon the contention that in history lies the test of the truth of
any doctrine. In a general way he brings this out by saying, “After all, fruit is the final
test; when any religious system has had a people under its influence for ages, it may
rightly be judged by its fruits.” 19 He next warns us not to spin out an a priori theory of
atonement after the fashion of Anselm, but to stay close to the facts. The older theory of
substitution he speaks of as “a fictitious haggling with abstract and fictitious justice.” 20
Again he says, “How then, are the sins of the world to be taken away? This question in a
forensic sense we dismiss altogether as being fictitious.” 21 From all this we may learn
16
 p. 16.
17
 p. 25.
18
 p. 29.
19
 p. 17.
20
 p. 162.
21
 p. 160.
that what Bowne thinks of as being a false a priori argument is any argument that seeks
to link up any one or all of the historical phenomena with the conception of an absolute
God. If the whole of the truth of Christianity can be tested by the fruits it bears in this
life, it is clear that the chief fruit of Christianity, which is that of eternal glory, must be
left out of consideration. In that case, the temporal has become the standard of the eternal
instead of the eternal the standard of the temporal. Moreover, if the moral consciousness
is without qualification held up as the judge of the fruits of Christianity, it follows that
the Bible claim to be the judge of the moral consciousness must first be abandoned.
Bowne has virtually embraced a Pragmatist view of history. It is only because of
results that we see in the present that the facts of the past have significance for us. All
that past facts may serve for, as far as we are concerned, is to be carriers of new ideas.
“We must see that the revelation consists essentially in the new ideas concerning God and
his will for men, and that all else—the history and the writing—are but means of setting
forth and preserving these ideas.” Or again, “If Christianity were not a world power, a
great spiritual force here and now, its origin would be a matter of profound indifference,
and nothing that happened thousands of years ago would ever make it credible to us.” 22
Now it is true that Bowne denies this. No fact of history is without its influence on other
facts of history, because the whole of history is connected by virtue of the plan of God.
For Bowne, the supreme fact of history, namely, the incarnation, might conceivably have
no effect on later facts of history. In order to entertain such an idea at all one must be
prepared to reject in toto the biblical concept of Christ as standard at the center of history,
as the hub about which all things revolve. The same rejection of the Christ of the
Scriptures is involved in Bowne’s reduction of every fact of history to a bearer of some
new ideas. This conception makes the uniqueness of Christ once for all impossible.
Nothing short of a completely Pragmatic concept of history is involved in the
objection which Bowne raises against the idea of absolute biblical authority, on the
ground that language is necessarily symbolical. He says, “The nature of language itself
makes it impossible that there should be any hard and fast objective interpretation. The
necessarily metaphorical nature of all language applying to spiritual relations bars the
way.” 23 But the physical universe is not something that exists apart from the spiritual.
God has laid a relationship between the physical and the spiritual inasmuch as both have
their origin and unity in him. It follows from this that the spiritual can be truly though
symbolically expressed by images borrowed from the physical. It is this conception that
underlies Jesus’ use of parabolic teaching. The vine and the branches give metaphorical
but truthful expression to the spiritual union between himself and his own, because the
physical is created for the purpose of giving expression to the spiritual. We find then that
one must first presuppose the antitheistic conception that nature is independent of God,
before one can urge the argument that symbolical language is necessarily to an extent
untruthful.
The same thing holds with respect to the objection that we cannot today accept the
thought patterns of the past. Bowne rejects the whole of the theory of the atonement on
the ground that it is couched in the terminology of an age given to legalism and
impersonalism. But one cannot urge this objection unless one has first assumed that
22
 p. 41, p. 42.
23
 p. 36.
history is a loose stream of disparate elements. Historic Christianity, on the other hand,
maintains that history is connected because the whole of it expresses the one grand plan
and purpose of God. And if this is true, there is no longer any objection to having one
historical fact be determinative for all other historical facts, nor is there then any
objection to having one thought pattern express an absolute truth. As a matter of fact,
there are then certain thought patterns that can never grow out of date. And of these the
legal relationship between God and man is one. The reason for this is that man is a
responsible creature. Man is responsible to God who is righteous. And since the thought
patterns of God do not change, neither do those of the creatures that are related to him.
The whole contention of Bowne and many others that we are today using ethical instead
of legal thought patterns is thoroughly false. The very contention of theism is that there
can be no truly ethical thought patterns unless they are based upon legal thought patterns.
God is man’s law-giver. In other words, the antithesis made between the legal and the
ethical is an artificial one which is born of an antitheistic motif.
When we look at the chapter Bowne has on Incarnation and Atonement we see still
more clearly that there is no stopping short of a complete rejection of theism if one begins
to rebel against the idea of a biblical authority.
Bowne needs but one page to refute completely the whole of the Chalcedon Creed. Its
statement that Christ has assumed human nature is summarily disposed of by saying,
“That nature is not a separate something to be put on like a garment, or joined on by
some metaphysical hyphen. It is simply the general law of humanity and if any being
should become subject, to that general law he would to that extent assume human
nature.” 24 For the church doctrine of the Christ as a divine person who has assumed a
human nature, Bowne, without any argument, substitutes the conception of the Christ as a
human person. Now it surely is as clear as can be that here he has exchanged theism for
antitheism. If Christ was a human person it means that the divine has merged itself in the
human and the eternal has merged itself in the temporal. It is of course very easy to point
out the difficulties that are involved in the Chalcedon doctrine as far as its conception of
the relation of the eternal and the temporal is concerned. But it would seem that anyone
rejecting the position because of these difficulties should substitute some other doctrines
less beset with difficulties. And this Bowne does not attempt to do. The only substitute
Bowne offers in this book and in his other books is that of a Pragmatist philosophy for
which the difference between time and eternity is wiped away.
The same naivete that we notice in Bowne’s rejection of the Chalcedon Creed appears
again when he gives us his theory of the atonement. We expect that it will be some form
of the moral influence theory. That is the only theory that fits with an essentially
Pragmatic conception of history. And a moral influence theory of atonement we do find.
He disposes of the substitutionary idea with the same ease with which he had disposed of
the Chalcedon Creed. He tells the story Coleridge told of a young man who offered to
substitute himself for a wayward son. The complete rejection by the mother of any such
idea proves conclusively, thinks Bowne, that substitution is out of the question in moral
matters. He says, “It shows how odious and abominable are the results when we discuss
this doctrine in terms of things and apply them to the relations of moral persons; and also
how utterly impossible it is that anyone should ever take another’s place in his moral
24
 p. 90.
relations.” 25 Again we ask what Bowne substitutes for that which he so lightheartedly
throws overboard. The only substitute we get for the resubstitutionary theory of
atonement is that of a vague moral universe in which there is somehow a large quantity of
evil and in which God and Christ are doing their best to help things along. God is the
wisest and most powerful of all beings. Naturally we should expect that he would set a
good example. In the moral world he that is greatest of all should be the servant of all. 26
Having rejected the idea of substitutionary atonement, Bowne goes on to reject the whole
of theism. The theory of the moral universe that he proposes for adoption—in which God
and man find themselves—is nothing short of the pagan ideas of Plato over again.
In spite of the fact that Bowne has been an ardent advocate of a personalistic
philosophy, he has really advocated an impersonalism. The determinative question here is
whether the personality of God is thought of as the most ultimate reality. According to
Plato, impersonal law is above God. And every system of thought that has in some form
or other maintained that there is any reality that is as ultimate as God, has followed Plato
in his ultimate impersonalism. This is what Bowne has constantly done. We have seen it
in his every argument against absolute authority. He takes for granted that the universe, at
least the moral universe, has laws that are above God. He argues exactly as Bosanquet
and the other Idealists do when they talk about law in general without asking whether
God is the source of law, all the while taking for granted that law is above God. Bowne
takes for granted that the moral consciousness of man functions apart from God. In his
Principles of Ethics he says, “If then in hunting up our genealogical record we should
come upon subhuman ancestors of arboreal habits, we should have no occasion, as
philosophers, to be startled, or to tremble for the validity of the multiplication table, or for
the golden rule.” 27 According to Bowne the moral consciousness of man can function
even if it is to be placed in a completely impersonal atmosphere. The existence of God is
of secondary and not of primary importance for Bowne. “Ethics begins independently but
must finally be affected by our metaphysics.” 28 And this has been the basis of his attack
on the conceptions of biblical authority, the Chalcedon Creed and the substitutionary
theory of atonement, namely, that an act to be personal must be unipersonal. He has
assumed that constructive activity of the human mind cannot rest upon a more ultimate
constructive activity of God or Christ. Thus he has rejected in toto the only completely
personalistic system of thought that exists, namely, Christian theism, which placed man
from the outset in a completely personalistic atmosphere and never for a moment takes
him out of this atmosphere.
Finally, we must once more stress the fact that this whole impersonalistic philosophy
has been shown to be implied in the rejection of absolute biblical authority. If one is
interested in holding to the orthodox theory of atonement, he may well guard himself
against the form of argument Bowne adduces against the conception of biblical authority.
If one is still interested in maintaining the orthodox doctrine of the divinity of Christ, he
may well guard himself against Bowne’s arguments against biblical authority. If one is
still interested in maintaining the orthodox conception of God as being back of the
25
 p. 138.
26
 p. 98.
27
 Op. cit., p. 11.
28
 Principles of Ethics, p. 17.
universe instead of being immersed in it, he may well guard himself against Bowne’s
argument against biblical authority. None of those interested in any of these matters can
allow Bowne or anyone else to start with a course of argumentation in which the moral
consciousness of man is taken as the final standard of judgment. Bowne’s whole system
of thought is based upon the assumption that regeneration is nothing at all. He makes the
sinner the judge of holy things. Only the Christian does truly know reality.
Chapter 14:
The Starting Point Of Christian Theistic
Epistemology:
E. The Subject-subject Relation
In the preceding chapters in which we have dealt with the starting point of
knowledge, there is one thought that has occurred constantly, namely, that antitheistic
and anti-Christian writers have at the outset of their argument taken their position for
granted. Now if this is true, the question that comes up at once is whether it is then of any
use to argue about the Christian theistic position at all with those who are of contrary
convictions.
It is this problem that must be discussed under the heading of the subject-subject
relation. Before doing so, let us bring afresh to our minds what we have found so far in
the matter of the starting point of knowledge. We must do this inasmuch as we come now
to the climax of the whole question, and we must have all the factors clearly in mind.
We have so far discussed the question of the object of knowledge. Under that heading
we saw that we may speak of the object of knowledge as such and that we must also
consider the relation of one object to other objects. And if we consider the relation of one
object to another object as they exist simultaneously, we have the question of space. On
the other hand, when we consider the object of knowledge in its relation to other objects
of knowledge that have existed at an earlier time or will exist at a later time, the whole
question of time is up for consideration. The final question, then, when considering the
object of knowledge, is whether the spatial-temporal universe exists by itself or whether
we must presuppose the existence of God in order to think intelligently of the spatial-
temporal world. We found that, according to Christian theism, every individual object of
knowledge to be known at all must be known in its relation to God. Then if one spatial
object is to be known in its relation to another spatial object, the connection must be
thought of as made by God. In other words, the universals of knowledge have their
source in God. Similarly, if one object of knowledge is to be known in its relation to
other objects of knowledge that have existed or will exist at another period of time, we
must think of the connection as being made by the plan of God.
On all these points the antitheist not only took the opposite position, but he took the
opposite position for granted as being so obviously the true position that he did not at all
need to discuss it. The antitheist took for granted the self-existence of the objects of
knowledge to begin with. He speaks of them as the “facts” from which it is obviously
necessary that we should begin as from something ultimate, for it is they that need
explanation. In the second place, it was taken for granted that if one object of knowledge
was to be known in its relation to other objects of knowledge, it is entirely unnecessary to
resort to God to furnish the connecting links. These connecting links either exist between
the objects themselves so that they are given with the facts, or the human mind furnishes
them. In other words, the universals are as ultimate as the facts. They think nobody would
dream of the law of self-contradiction as having anything to do with God. They hold this
to be so patently absurd as to require no more than ridicule for disproof. Similarly, if one
object of knowledge is to be known in its relation to other objects of knowledge that have
occurred or will occur at another time, it is taken for granted that the connection is
somehow found between the facts themselves without the necessity of reference to any
mind, or if reference to mind is considered necessary, it is at least taken for granted that
the human mind can furnish the universal in this case also.
From these assumptions of antitheistic thought it follows that if God is to have any
significance for the objects of knowledge at all he must be reduced to one individual
object of knowledge among many others. Christian theism on the contrary says that God
is the one supreme object of knowledge. He is the most ultimate fact and the most
ultimate universal. It is from him that all facts and all universals that we ordinarily deal
with derive their meaning.
On the question of the subject of knowledge, we found the same sort of situation. In
the first place, Christian theism maintains that the subject of knowledge owes its
existence to God. Accordingly, all its interpretative powers are from God and must
therefore be reinterpretative powers. In the second place, when the subject of knowledge
is to come into contact with the object of knowledge, the connection is possible only
because God has laid it there. In other words, the subject-object relation has its validity
via God. Theologically expressed, we say that the validity of human knowledge in
general rests upon the testimonium Spiritus Sancti. In addition to this, Christian theism
maintains that since sin has come into the world, no subject of knowledge can really
come into contact with any object of knowledge, in the sense of interpreting it properly,
unless the Scripture give the required light and unless the regeneration by the Spirit give
a new power of sight.
In opposition to this, the antitheist holds it to be self-evident that the subject of
knowledge exists in its own right and can interpret truly without any reference to God.
The “natural man” claims to be able to interpret nature and history properly without the
need of any reference to God, to Scripture, or to regeneration.
It follows from this clear-cut difference, a difference that goes to the bottom so that
not a single “fact” or “law” is left for neutral territory, that the one group must naturally
regard the other as being blind. Accordingly, it is when the question of the subject-subject
relation comes up, that this problem as to what one group thinks of the other group,
becomes acute. The reason why Christians have not always been alive to this difficulty is
that they have not always been consistent in drawing the distinction between the
Christian theistic and the antitheistic system of epistemology clearly and fully. All too
often they have allowed a hazy fringe to remain when it came to the question of whether
unbelievers really know material facts aright. Christianity has all too often been
interpreted in a narrowly soteriological fashion. Accordingly, the territory of nature and
of history was left vacant for any first comer to occupy. If, however, we take Christianity
seriously with its philosophy of nature and of history, it becomes at once apparent that a
life and death struggle is set in motion.
It follows then that the question of the subject-subject relation cannot be discussed in
peace. There is, of course, a sense in which this can be done. In the first place, when the
question of the subject-subject relation is limited to that of one regenerated subject to
another regenerated subject the answer is not difficult. In that case, the communication
between one subject and another subject is possible through God once more. Taken in the
soteriological sense, we say that it is the Holy Spirit who is the agent of communication,
and that communication is effected as communion of the saints through the mystic union
with Christ. Taken in a more comprehensive and cosmic sense, this communion does not
stop till it has enveloped heaven and earth. There is then a Christian consciousness which
is aware of the fact that it alone has the true interpretation of nature and of history. All
too often it happens that scientists who are Christians are not aware of this Christian
consciousness and, therefore, do not place their labors at the foot of the cross. On the
other hand, all too often theologians have been to blame for this neglect on the part of
scientists because they have spoken as though Christianity has no direct bearing upon
science.
In the second place, there can be a relatively peaceful discussion of the question of
the subject-subject relation, if the question is limited to the relation of one unregenerate
subject to another unregenerate subject. In that case there may still be many differences
on detail such as those between realism and Idealism, but these differences are small in
comparison to the great unity with which they all agree that wherever the connecting link
between subjects of knowledge may have to be sought, it need not be sought in God.
What we must deal with then is the clash between the two great opposing systems of
epistemology. We now ask not how the two should reason together, but whether they
should seek to reason together.
For the antitheist, this question is not difficult. For him the only cause of our
blindness is that we have been brought up in unfortunate circumstances. It may take quite
some time and may often require measures of force as well as of ridicule to force upon us
the light that they claim to have. But there is for them no inherent difficulty such as we
have with respect to them. With respect to them, we have the conviction that they will not
see our point of view till the Holy Spirit pleases to regenerate them. So the question
narrows itself down to this, whether we shall, in view of our convictions with respect to
the necessity of regeneration, nevertheless continue to reason with unbelievers.
We shall do well to consider briefly the answers that have been given to this question.
In the first place, let us note that there has been a large group of Christian theistic writers
who have readily answered our question in the affirmative. We need only to recall that
the Arminian theologians, whose writings we have had under review, thought it
altogether proper and useful to make an intellectual defense of Christianity. In addition to
this, we observe that the English-American tradition of Calvinism, strongly as it has been
influenced by the method employed in Butler’s Analogy, has been much concerned about
apologetics in all of its writings. The often very sharp distinction made between natural
and revealed theology by both Arminians and Calvinists points to a conviction that it is
possible to establish at least the truths of natural theology by sheer force of argument,
even if it requires faith to accept the truths of revealed theology.
We may perhaps profitably take the brief discussion of Dr. Charles Hodge in his
Systematic Theology as one of the characteristic ways of reasoning about the place and
function of reason in connection with the truths of Christianity.
The first function of reason, he says, is that of the reception of revelation. Revelation
is addressed to rational beings. “This is what theologians are accustomed to call the usus
organicus seu instrumentalis, rationis. About this there can be no dispute.” 1
On this question, it would seem that the contention of Dr. Hodge is true enough in
itself, but that it should be remembered that there has, as a matter of fact, been much
1
 Vol. 1, p. 50.
dispute even about this function of reason. What is meant by reason here is the intellect.
And it is of some significance in an age of anti-intellectualism that we assure ourselves
carefully about the relation of the intellect to the other aspects of human personality.
There is an anti-Christian mysticism that has discounted the intellect, and there is also a
Christian mysticism that has discounted the intellect. Of both of these Hodge speaks at
length in other connections. We need only to recall that against non-Christian mysticisms
of all sort, Christian theism cannot but maintain that the intellect is an aspect of human
personality that can never be ignored when the question of the reception of revelation is
considered. We cannot set aside or override the human intellect at any time or anywhere.
We believe that to an extent the most recent psychology, with its emphasis upon the
conception of organism, is realizing this. At any rate, it is clearly implied in the
conception of man as created in the image of God.
It is well, however, to be on our guard against over-emphasis on this matter. Roman
Catholic writers naturally rebel against the anti-intellectualism of our day, and
accordingly write against it, as for instance, in the case of Fulton J. Sheen. Still it should
be remembered that what has shown itself to be a dangerous intellectualism in Roman
Catholic epistemology, appears afresh in Sheen’s book, God and Intelligence. What is
meant by a dangerous intellectualism is not a somewhat undue emphasis upon the
intellect to the detriment of the emotional or volitional life of human personality. That is
not a serious matter. That depends to a large extent upon temperament. What is meant is
the setting up of the intellect as something that is in a measure independent of God. This
is done in Platonic philosophy. And this has been done historically to some extent by
Roman Catholic theologians. And if this is done it is at bottom as great a danger as when
the emotional life is set up in independence of God. The important matter is that the
whole consciousness of man, whether it be his intellect or his will or his emotion, be
thought of as completely reinterpretative.
This leads us to a second remark on the usus instrumentalis of the intellect. It should
not be forgotten that the revelation of God comes to the whole consciousness of man. It is
not the impartation of intellectual truths only that we meet in the Christian revelation.
There is a constant danger lurking here. We tend so easily to think of Christianity as a
series of intellectual propositions only. But the intellectual element cannot be separated
from the factual element. Redemption is a mighty fact that addresses itself to the whole of
the human personality. Accordingly, it is impossible to speak of the intellect per se,
without taking into consideration whether it is the intellect of a regenerated person or of a
non-regenerated person. The human intellect, wherever it appears, appears either as an
aspect of a Christian personality, or as an aspect of a non-Christian personality.
The Paradox theology is subject to the same criticism to which the position of Sheen
is subject, namely, that it is really a shift from one antitheistic position to another
antitheistic position. Barth and his school would seem to do away with the usus
instrumentalis of the intellect altogether. God is said to reveal himself in spite of man’s
intellect. But, strange to say, in this way Barth has really once more made the human
consciousness apart from God, the standard of truth. That this is so may be observed from
the fact that Barth’s position involves the denial of the traditional conception of the
absolute self-consciousness of God. If God is thought of as absolutely self-conscious,
man must be thought of as created in his image. And if man is created in God’s image,
his intellect is certainly finite, so that it cannot be ultimately interpretative, but it is
equally certain the avenue by which revelation must come to man’s self-consciousness.
One cannot say that the human intellect is paradoxical and mean therewith self-
contradictory, unless one surrounds man with complete irrationality. And if man is
surrounded by complete irrationality, it is, after all, the human consciousness that sets up
shop for itself apart from God.
It appears then that even when we discuss what seems to be such a self-evident matter
as the usus instrumentalis of the intellect of man, we must be on our guard against (a) all
forms of antitheistic anti-intellectualism, and (b) all forms of antitheistic intellectualisms.
Then when we are in Christian territory, it is only a matter of the correct psychological
emphasis. Only in this case too there is still an epistemological interest, inasmuch as it
often happens that a wrong psychological emphasis all too readily lends to, and is already
a symptom of, a wrong epistemological emphasis.
The second point raised by Hodge is of more direct significance for our purposes. He
says that in addition to the usus instrumentalis of the intellect, “Christians concede to
reason the judicium contradictionis, that is, the prerogative of deciding whether a thing is
possible or impossible. If it is seen to be impossible, no authority and no amount or kind
of evidence can impose the obligation to receive it as true.” 2 The importance of this point
for the whole of the theology of Hodge can be observed if it be noted that it is this
conception of the function of reason that underlies all his refutation of antitheistic and
anti-Christian systems of thought. So, for example, when he is combating Materialism, he
heads some of the sections of his refutation by such subjects as these: “Materialism
contradicts the facts of Consciousness”; “Materialism contradicts the Truths of Reason”;
“Materialism inconsistent with the Facts of Experience.” 3
Now with respect to this matter of the reason as the judicium contradictionis, we
believe that it is in consonance with the genius of the theology Hodge is setting forth to
introduce more clearly the distinctions we have spoken of above, namely, that we must
always ask which reason or intellect it is that we are speaking of—that of the regenerate
or that of the unregenerate. That this is so can be more easily observed today than it could
fifty years ago. It is today more evident than ever before that it is exactly on those most
fundamental matters such as possibility and probability that there is the greatest
difference of opinion between theists and antitheists. We may take for example the most
fundamental matters which Hodge adduces in order to prove that to reason belongs the
prerogative of judicium contradictionis. He gives us some examples of what reason
would naturally regard as impossible, so that revelation could not make us believe it. He
says: “That is impossible which involves a contradiction; as, that a thing is and is not;
that right is wrong and wrong right. (2) It is impossible that God should do, approve or
command what is morally wrong. (3) It is impossible that he should require us to believe
that which contradicts any of the laws of belief which he has impressed upon our nature.
(4) It is impossible that one truth should contradict another. It is impossible, therefore,
that God should reveal anything as true which contradicts any well authenticated truth,
whether of intuition, experience, or previous revelation.” 4
2
 Vol. 1, p. 51.
3
 Vol. 1, pp. 276–282.
4
 Vol. 2, p. 51.
The first one of these matters enumerated by Hodge strikes at the root of the whole
contention since it brings up the matter of predication itself. The question is what can be
and what cannot be intelligibly said about anything. When we take this question out of its
limitation to physical objects where it seems to have such an evident application, we find
that there is no more fundamental difference between theism and antitheism than on the
matter of predication. Theism holds that all predication presupposes the existence of God
as a self-conscious being, while antitheism holds that predication is possible without any
reference to God. In fact all non-Christian views, in effect, maintain that man has no
freedom to interpret reality properly so long as the God of orthodox Christianity is in
absolute control of history. This at once gives to the terms ‘is’ and ‘is not’ quite different
connotations. For the antitheist these terms play upon the background of bare possibility.
Hence the theist must contend that ‘is’ and ‘is not’ may very well be reversed upon an
antitheistic basis. The theist must contend that the antitheist has, in effect, fundamentally
denied the very law of contradiction, inasmuch as the law of contradiction has its
foundation in the nature of God. On the other hand, the antitheist from his standpoint will
not hesitate to say that the theist has denied the law of contradiction. For him, the belief
in an absolutely self-conscious God is tantamount to the rejection of the law of
contradiction, inasmuch as such a belief does not place ‘is’ and ‘is not’ in a correlative
basis. The conception of an absolutely self-conscious God definitely limits the field of the
possible to that which is according to the will and nature of God. We saw that the logic of
Bosanquet, to use the reasoning of one who has most thoroughly investigated the matter
of predication, could not allow for affirmation unless there should be an equally ultimate
negation. This position was involved in the metaphysical contention that reality must be
both essentially analytic and essentially synthetic. If then there is such a fundamentally
exclusive difference of opinion on the question of what the law of contradiction itself is
between theists and non-theists, it is quite out of the question to speak of the law of
contradiction as something that all men have in common.
To be sure, all men have the law of contradiction in common in the sense that all
men, as creatures made in the image of God, cannot but function in a universe that
embodies the ordinances of God. But non-Christians do not believe in such a universe.
They believe that man is autonomous, that he is surrounded by a world of pure contingent
factuality, and that he himself must seek to impose order upon pure factual contingency
by means of laws of logic that exist in themselves. Accordingly, the Christian, having
opposite views of reality, has opposite views of the nature and function of logic in
relation to reality.
In consonance with this we may call attention to the fact that on the question of
possibility the same difference of opinion exists that we found on the matter of
predication. For the theist, possibility has its source in God, while for the antitheist, God
has his source in possibility. Hence, what one will deem most possible, the other will
consider altogether impossible.
Similarly, once more with the question of probability. For theism, God is the source
of the probable. For antitheism, the probable is the source of God. Hence, what one
thinks altogether probable, the other will think altogether improbable.
The reason why these differences do not appear on the surface is that, as a matter of
fact, all men are human beings who are created in the image of God. Even the non-
regenerate have by virtue of common grace some remnant of what should be though it is
not, the general consciousness of mankind. Accordingly, it happens that there is an
incidental agreement on many matters of the moral life. It is in a general sense true that
everyone holds murder to be wrong. But the agreement is no more than incidental. A
theist holds murder to be wrong because it violates the justice of God. A non-Christian
holds murder to be wrong because it is not in the best interest of the human race.
According to theism, the idea of justice has its foundation in the nature of God.
According to Pragmatism, the idea of justice is a historical development in the
consciousness of the race. Accordingly, there is nothing that the two conceptions of
justice have in common except the name. “What is morally wrong” is therefore not a
phrase into which everybody spontaneously pours the same thought content. The
agreement on this matter then between theists and antitheists, in addition to being merely
incidental, is also merely formal and abstract. This formal and abstract agreement we
expect because man, by virtue of his creation in God’s image, cannot be metaphysically
alienated from God, however much he may be ethically alienated.
In the second place, we may mention as a reason why these fundamental differences
are not easily observed, the fact that the incidental and abstract agreement between theists
and antitheists on moral and intellectual matters usually deals with things that are
proximate rather than with things that are ultimate. When a theist and an antitheist
together look at a cow, it is quite true that they will be in hearty agreement that the cow
cannot both be and not be. But let them ask the question of “to be or not to be” about
God, and it appears at once that the antitheist says that God once was not and now is. In
other words, he believes in accordance with the tenets of his system, in a finite God. And
if it then be said that even the antitheist will admit that God cannot both be and not be at
this moment, it is true but meaningless, because it is complete abstraction that can be of
no influence on life. The real question is whether we can intelligibly think of the non-
existence of God. If we maintain that we can, affirmation and negation are lost in a
shoreless sea of possibility, so that the law of contradiction does not mean the same thing
that it did before.
With this basic distinction between theism and antitheism in mind, we may briefly
consider the other matters that Hodge brings up in this connection. “It is impossible that
God should do, approve or command what is morally wrong.” If this is taken as
something more than a mere abstract statement, there is a fundamental difference
between theists and antitheists as to what is morally wrong. Antitheism has a relativist
theory of morality, while theism has an absolutist theory of morality. The non-Christian
can hold that what was once wrong is wrong no more, or that what once was not wrong is
now wrong. Now to an extent a theist may allow for differences of circumstances, but the
difference between a relativist and an absolutist morality remains. Accordingly, the really
important issue cannot be decided by any such thing as a general moral consciousness.
Hodge says further that it is impossible that God should command anything that
“contradicts any of the laws of belief which he has impressed upon our nature.” That is
true for the theist, but as for the antitheist, he does not believe that God has impressed
any laws of belief upon our nature. Accordingly, a theist could say of an antitheist that
upon his basis anything is possible because our nature may change into the opposite of
itself. In other words, upon an antitheistic basis there is no ground for any such thing as a
definite nature which contains unchangeable laws. If laws do not change, it is merely a
matter of chance.
Still further, the proofs adduced by Hodge in order to establish the judicium
contradictionis of reason themselves indicate the necessity of introducing the distinction
we have made. He tells us that, in the first place, the judicium contradictionis is true from
the nature of the case. He says, “Faith includes an affirmation of the mind that a thing is
true. But it is a contradiction to say that the mind can affirm that to be true which it sees
cannot possibly be true.... We are consequently not only authorized but required to
pronounce anathema an apostle or an angel from heaven, who should call upon us to
receive as a revelation from God anything absurd or wicked, or inconsistent with the
intellectual or moral nature with which he has endowed us.” 5 Now the first statement is
no doubt true as it stands. But we have seen that the Christian and the non-Christian have
quite different ideas about what is possible. Many a materialist has been so firmly
convinced of his position that he thought he would be involved in a contradiction if he
should accept the bodily resurrection of Christ. This shows that the abstract statement
made can have no indifferent application. In the second place, we have shown that the
Christian and the non-Christian have quite the opposite ideas about what is immoral or
against our intellectual natures. Many Idealists say outright that it is a contradiction in
terms to say that one believes in an absolute God and also believes that the created
universe adds to the glory of God. To them this is as manifestly impossible and absurd as
it would be to try to add water to a pail that is already filled. Yet a Christian’s contention
is that this is not a self-contradiction, but something which is merely beyond our
understanding. So again we conclude that the law abstractly stated has no application,
while if taken concretely, the difference between the regenerate and the non-regenerate
consciousness is at once of the utmost importance.
The second reason adduced by Hodge is that Scripture itself tells us that we may not
accept the religion of pagans, etc., because the religion of pagans involves absurdities and
cannot be true. “Paul does the same thing when he calls upon us to pronounce even an
angel accursed, who should teach another gospel.” 6 But plainly Scripture is speaking to
the people of God, that is, it addresses itself to the regenerate consciousness when it
speaks in this way. Otherwise, the statement of Paul itself would involve a contradiction.
Paul could not possibly be speaking to both the regenerate and the non-regenerate
consciousness, because these two entertained mutually exclusive gospels. The non-
regenerate would have to declare the true gospel anathema, while the regenerate
consciousness would have to declare the false gospel anathema. This shows the utter
inapplicability of the law of contradiction, abstractly stated. And if the non-regenerate
consciousness were told to apply the law of contradiction as they see it to the gospel as
they see it, it would mean that they were told to reject the gospel.
Finally Hodge tells us, “The ultimate ground of faith and knowledge is confidence in
God. We can neither believe nor know anything unless we confide in those laws of belief
which God has implanted in our nature. If we can be required to believe what contradicts
those laws, then the foundations are broken up.” 7 This statement too is true. Yet it must
be understood as applying only to those who are willing to recognize that it is God who
has implanted laws of belief in our nature. To be sure, none have any right to destroy the
5
 Vol. 1, p. 52.
6
 Vol. 1, p. 52.
7
 Vol. 1, p. 53.
laws of belief implanted in their nature by God. We believe that, as a matter of fact, God
has implanted such laws in man, and that no man has the right to break those laws, just as
we believe that no man has the right to sin. But men too often call, and in themselves
always do call, the good evil and the evil good. And it is this fact that makes it impossible
now to appeal to such a consciousness as a judge of any moral or ultimate intellectual
questions, unless this consciousness is regenerated. The foundations have, as a matter of
fact, been destroyed as far as sinful man is concerned. Accordingly, the sinner must be
placed upon a new foundation before appeal can be made to him as to one fully
competent to judge.
Our conclusion, then, can be no other than that if the truth that Hodge wants to bring
out is not to be obscured, it is necessary to bring it in relation with the considerations just
now advanced. Before we seek to do so we must turn to those who have given due
consideration to the distinction between the regenerate and the non-regenerate
consciousness, but who have drawn from it the conclusion that it is, therefore, really
useless for the regenerate consciousness to reason with the non-regenerate consciousness.
The great exponent of this view is Abraham Kuyper. In his Encyclopedia of Sacred
Theology he has worked out his conception of a two-fold science on the basis of the two-
fold consciousness. Now we cannot do more than barely touch upon the view there
expounded. The main point is that it brings out strongly the effect of sin upon the
consciousness of man. Kuyper tries to show that the non-regenerate man, even when a
scientist, is constantly laboring under the prejudices of hatred against God. Accordingly,
if man is to see things aright, he must be regenerated. It follows that the non-regenerate
cannot understand the regenerate in all their purposes and strivings, and the arguments
that seem sound to the regenerate will seem unsound to the non-regenerate, and vice
versa. This seems to make argument useless. Accordingly, Kuyper has assigned a very
subordinate part of the theological encyclopedia to the apologist. It is but a subdivision of
the various branches of theology. And in addition to this he has limited the task of the
apologist to that of a negative defense. Speaking of apologetics, he says, “Ze is niet
diatheitisch, want ze bescryft het Dogma niet, ze is niet thetisch want, want ze stelt het
Dogma niet, maar ze is antithetisch, overmits ze haar pleit ten behoeve van het Dogma
voert tegenover hetgeen de pseudo-philosophie tegen het Dogma, zyn gronden of
gevolgen, overstelt.” 8
We see from this quotation that though Kuyper has strongly emphasized the
difference between the two types of consciousness, he does deem it possible to defend the
Christian system of thought against unbelief in some way. It is not altogether correct then
to say that Kuyper has allowed no place for apologetics, unless it be proved that this
statement of his is out of harmony with the main contention of his work. In addition to
this, it should be observed that, for a correct understanding of Kuyper’s position, it is
necessary to keep in mind that for him the apologist is not the only one that deals with the
relation of the Christian theistic conception of reality to the antitheistic conception of
reality. There is also the Christian philosopher. And to the Christian philosopher a much
more important task is assigned than to the apologist. The apologist has, according to
Kuyper, nothing to do with the so-called Prinzipienlehre. As Far as the fundamental
principles of knowledge must be discussed and brought into relation with the
8
 Vol. 3, p. 459.
fundamental principles of the non-regenerate consciousness, that is the task of Christian
philosophy. Kuyper says, “Voorzoover toch deze principia of algemeene onderstellingen
op het verband van de Theologie met de algemeene wetenschap betrekking hebben,
hooren ze als ontleend aan de Christelyke Philosophie, in de Encyclopaedie thuis.” 9 In
addition to this he tells us that the task of comparing the true and the false systems of
philosophy also is to be done by the Christian philosopher. Speaking again of apologetics
he says, “ ... maar zoover ze met de philosophie in conflict komt, staat het niet aan haar
om de ware philosophie tegen de pseudo-philosophie over te stellen, wyl deze taak aan de
Christelyke Philosophie is aangewezen, maar heeft zezich te bepalen tot het verdedigen
van haar eigen positie, voorzoover die door de Pseudo-philosophie in theologics wordt
aangerand.” 10
Finally, we should add to this that in another connection Kuyper says that the task of
apologetics is not strictly limited to that of a negative defense. He says, “Niet enkel ter
weerlegging van den tegenstander, maar ter wille van de eere der waarheid, en voor
haar eigen rust voert ze haar verweer.” From these quotations it may be learned that if
we gather up the work that Kuyper assigns to Christian philosophy and to apologetics, we
come to much the same task that the apologist is given in the English speaking tradition
of Reformed theology.
Whatever may be said in favor of making a sharp distinction between the work of a
Christian philosopher and an apologist, it is in practice impossible for any Christian
apologist to limit his task to that assigned to him by Kuyper. In the First place, the
borderline between that which is in theologicis and that which is in philosophicis is so
thin that it cannot always be discerned with exactitude. It can be no more than a matter of
emphasis. In the second place, one cannot be exclusively defensive. One must also to an
extent be thetical, especially when it comes to the matter of Principienlehr. The
diathetical, the thetical and the antithetical can at most be matters of emphasis. But all
this does not touch the main point. The main point is that Kuyper has himself appointed
to the Christian consciousness the task of reasoning with the non-Christian
consciousness. In addition to that he has often been very much engaged in apologetics in
his own reasoning. That is, he has constantly tried to set the whole of the Christian
theistic conception of life in contrast with the non-theistic conception of life and has
pointed out the advantages of the Christian position. But he has spoken of all this as
witnessing to the world rather than reasoning with the world. If we keep in mind in this
connection that the position of Hodge and Warfield is also glad to recognize the fact that
regeneration is necessary if there is to be a genuine reception of the truth, it appears that
the difference is perhaps not as great as it is sometimes said to be. The yes of Hodge and
Warfield in answer to the question whether it is possible to reason with the non-
regenerate consciousness, and the no of Kuyper, have neither of them been unqualified.
Building then upon both of these traditions, we may briefly indicate what would seem
to be the most truly Christian theistic way of stating the relation between the two types of
consciousness under discussion. Much, however, remains to be done in the way of a
Christian psychology and the development of the doctrine of common grace, before any
9
 Vol. 3, p. 460.
10
 Vol. 3, p. 258.
really adequate statement of the question can be given. We shall attempt to do no more
than give a few suggestions.
In the first place, our discussion has brought out that we must clearly recognize the
fact of the fundamental difference between the two types of consciousness. If we do not
do this we argue in the blue. It does us no good to talk about reason in the abstract. Such
a thing does not exist.
Yet we must recognize the truth contained in the contention that there is a general
consciousness of man. We can do this first of all by recognizing that there once was such
a consciousness. We must go back to the Adamic consciousness as being the
fundamentally human consciousness. We speak now of the Adamic consciousness
previous to the entrance of sin in the world. As such it was entirely able to judge, for the
good reason that it was not ethically alienated from God. Not as though man’s original
ethical consciousness was able, by and of itself, to judge between right and wrong. Even
before the fall man’s ethical consciousness needed the instruction directly given it by
God’s speaking with man. But because of its inherently right attitude toward God and his
revelation, man’s moral consciousness could judge between right and wrong. The fact
that man was a temporal creature did not hinder him from seeing the truth about the
relation of God to the universe. It is true that the range of his knowledge never could be
as comprehensive as the range of the knowledge of God. But this was not necessary.
Validity did not depend upon range. We cannot say then that because man was a finite
creature, he could not relate man properly to the existence of God but had to live by
revelation from the outset. There is no such contrast between revelation and reasoning in
the case of Adam. He could reason soundly just because he reasoned in an atmosphere of
revelation. His very mind with its laws was a revelation of God. Accordingly, he would
reason analogically and not univocally. He would always be presupposing God in his
every intellectual operation. He did not reason from nature or from himself as existing
independently, to God as the “first cause.” He reasoned as one seeing all things from the
beginning for what they are, i.e., dependent upon God.
As entirely dependent upon God metaphysically and as perfect ethically, man, at the
beginning of history, recognized that all about him and all within him was revelational of
God. Moreover, from the beginning God spoke with man about his handling of the facts
of his space-time environment. Accordingly, Adam reasoned within an environment
which was exhaustively revelational, and in obedience to a supernatural word revelation
that was supplemental to his created environment. At the beginning, therefore, Adam
could not start from the facts of the space-time world and ask himself whether or not they
were related to God. A child in a home does not ask whether he has a father.
It follows then that because we hold that there once was no ethical alienation between
God and the consciousness of man, but perfect harmony, we can now say that the
consciousness of man should be perfect too. In other words, we hold that the Christian
theistic system is as a matter of fact the truth. Accordingly, to be truly human one must
recognize this truth. Just as God continues in the Scriptures to hold before the sinners’
eyes the duty of being perfect though man in himself can never be perfect, so it follows
that it is the task of the Christian apologist to hold before man the truth, and God’s
requirement that men should accept the truth, even though he knows that it requires the
grace of God for man to see it. There is in this matter nothing else to consider but the
command of God.
Since it is upon God’s command that the work must be undertaken, it is God’s
command that gives one the assurance that the work will accomplish its purpose. Looking
at matters by themselves, it would be worse than useless to undertake reasoning with
unbelievers. But it is the deep conviction of the total depravity of man that makes one
throw his whole reliance upon God in all respects, and not the least in this question of
reasoning with unbelievers. It is only he who deeply believes in the total depravity of
man that can really preach with conviction that his work will not be in vain. Since he is
convinced that the ethical alienation has been against God and against nothing else, he
also knows that God is able to remove the ethical alienation. He, therefore, trusts that the
Holy Spirit to whom, in the economy of redemption, the task has been assigned of
convicting the world of judgment, will use the means of rational argumentation to
accomplish his task. This hope is not inconsistent with the conception of the immediacy
of the work of the Holy Spirit. That immediacy is complete. Our arguments taken by
themselves effect nothing, while the Holy Spirit may very well convict without the use of
our argument as he may convict without the use of our preaching. Yet because God is
himself a completely rational God and has created us in his image, there is every reason
to believe that he will make argumentation effective.
Then further it should be remembered in this connection that because man is a
creature of God, it is impossible that he should ever be alienated from God
metaphysically. He can never actually become the independent being that he thinks he is.
Even the king’s heart is in the hand of God as the watercourses. We have seen above that
it was exactly because of this fact that man is, as a matter of fact, utterly dependent upon
God, that a complete ethical alienation could take place. And it is for the same reason that
the ethical alienation can be removed. It is this that had entered so deeply into
Augustine’s soul when he told God to command him anything whatsoever, because it was
God who first had to give what he commanded. And God can give what he commands
because man has always remained his creature. There is then even in the consciousness of
the non-regenerate a formal power of receptivity. It is this that enables him to consider
the Christian theistic position and see that it stands squarely over against his own, and
demands of him the surrender of his own position.
Still further we should recall that the ethical alienation, though complete and
exclusive in principle, is not yet complete in degree. It is this conception of the relatively
good in the absolutely evil that underlies the contention of Hodge that there is a general
moral consciousness of man that may be trusted in moral matters to some extent.
Everybody admits that murder is wrong. Even the non-regenerate admit that. And though
this fact must ever be taken in connection with the fundamental difference between the
two types of consciousness, it is, taken together with the metaphysical considerations of
the preceding paragraph, once more a formal power of receptivity on the part of the non-
regenerate by virtue of which he can consider Christianity as a challenge to himself.
If we thought of the non-regenerate consciousness what it thinks of itself, we should
not attempt to reason with it. By that we mean that the non-regenerate consciousness
thinks itself to be independent of God metaphysically and ethically. If we thought there
was any truth in this we could not argue with it, because with a being metaphysically
independent, it would not be possible to come into any intellectual or moral contact at all.
We hold, then, that though the ethical miracle of regeneration must occur before
argumentation can be really effectual, such an ethical miracle will certainly occur. Not as
though we know this with respect to every individual with whom we reason. To hold that
would be to deny the free grace of God in connection with the miracle of regeneration.
But we do know that it is true, in a general sense, that God will bring sinners to
repentance, since the whole work of redemption would fail if he did not. It is thus in this
higher unity of the comprehensive plan and purpose of God which rests upon his being,
that we must seek the solution of the difficulty encountered when we think of the
complete ethical alienation of man from God, and the efforts of the redeemed to reason
with those who are not redeemed. The problem is, after all, logically beset with no greater
difficulties than is the whole problem of the relation of the absolute consciousness of God
to the finite consciousness of man. It is but a subdivision of this more general problem.
The completeness of the ethical alienation of man does not make it any more difficult
than before for God to come into moral contact with man. If then we only consider our
argumentation as an instrument of the Holy Spirit, we may partake of the assurance that
God’s power is in our work. On the other hand, the moment we begin to think of our
work as something that is independent of the Spirit, we have no more right to expect
anything from it.
It is not, then, as though the clear recognition of the fundamental ethical difference
between the regenerate and the non-regenerate consciousness implies that there is a two-
fold truth, or that we must use one type of argument for one type of consciousness and
another type of argument for the other type of consciousness. It is exactly the deep
conviction that there is metaphysically only one type of consciousness, and that the non-
regenerate and the regenerate consciousness are but ethical modifications of this one
fundamental metaphysical consciousness, that leads us to reason with unbelievers. And it
is exactly because of our deep conviction that God is one and truth is therefore one, that
we hold that there is only one type of argument for all men. All that the recognition of the
deep ethical difference does is to call attention to this very fact that it is God who must
make this one truth effective in the hearts of men. Magna est veritas et praevalebit!
We subjoin a brief bibliography of the chief books and articles dealing with this
subject, either directly or by implication.
H. Bavinck
 1. Philosophy of Revelation
2. Christelyke Wetenschap
3. Zekerheid des Geloofs
4. Roeping en Wedergeboorte
5. Dogmatiek, Vol. F
A. Kuyper Encyclopedia of Sacred Theology
B. B. Warfield 1. Introduction to Beattie’s Apologetics
2. “Apologetics”—article in Schaff-Herzog
3. “Christian Supernaturalism”—Princeton Theological Review
4. Revelation and Inspiration—Collected works
5. Calvin and Calvinism
J. De Witt “Testimony of the Holy Spirit to the Bible”—Princeton Theological Review
W. B. Greene, Jr. 1. “Function of Reason in Christianity”—Princeton Theological Review
2. “Reasonableness of the Vicarious Atonement”—Princeton Theological Review
3. “Metaphysics of Apologetics” (4 articles)—Princeton Theological Review
4. “The Supernatural”—Princeton Theological Review
Griffin
 1. “Epistemological Argument for Theism”—Princeton Theological Review
2. “Personality the Supreme Category of Philosophy”—Princeton Theological Review
Charles Hodge Systematic Theology, Vol. 1
C. W. Hodge 1. “Finality of the Christian Religion”—Princeton Theological Review
2. “Witness of the Holy Spirit to the Bible”—Princeton Theological Review
3. “What Is a Miracle?”—Princeton Theological Review
V. Hepp 1. Testimonium Spiritus Sancti
2. Gereformeerde Apologetik
Chapter 15:
The Method Of Christian Theistic
Epistemology
Having before us all the factors that enter into the knowledge situation, and having on
the basis of them concluded in the preceding chapter that it is necessary to reason with
those who believe differently than we do, we must turn to a consideration of the question
of how we should reason with them.
In the second chapter we discussed some of the epistemological terms that have
bearing upon the question of the method. We must now set that discussion into the more
advanced context at which we have arrived. The thing that has gradually shown itself to
be of momentous importance is this fact that all reasoning in the field of knowledge must
take into consideration the difference between those who accept and those who reject
Christian theism. Whatever method we employ will have to figure from the outset with
this difference. The question is no longer how I may obtain knowledge of some object
with which I come in contact. Nor is it only the question of how I may impart that
knowledge to my fellow man in general. The question is rather how I may impart the
knowledge that I have to those who by virtue of their opposition have no true knowledge
and yet think that they have.
Something of this was brought out when we said that God’s knowledge of himself
and God’s knowledge of the facts of the universe must be the standard of our knowledge.
God is completely self-conscious and therefore knows himself and all things analytically.
There is in God’s thought complete coherence. Keeping this in mind, we may say that if
we are to have coherence in our thinking it will have to be a coherence that corresponds
to God’s coherence. Accordingly, our coherence will never be completely inclusive in the
way that God’s coherence is completely inclusive. Our coherence will be no more than an
analogy of the coherence of God. Yet because it is based upon God’s coherence it will be
true knowledge. Our coherence can constantly grow in comprehensiveness but it cannot
grow in truthfulness. Those that have the least knowledge have true knowledge just as
well as those that have the greatest knowledge, if only their knowledge is truly
analogical, i.e., based upon the knowledge that God has of himself and of the world.
If this fundamental point is not forgotten, we can speak in the ordinary
epistemological language. We may then say that we employ the methods of analysis and
synthesis. What we mean by synthesis is not that which Bosanquet means by synthesis
when he says that reality is essentially synthetic. Our conception of God maintains the
reverse of that. But for us the time series brings forth that which is new for us.
Accordingly, we have to synthesize the new facts with the old facts. Then when we have
done that we must proceed once more to see what the new facts thus related to the old
facts together reveal about God and reality in general. In this respect the process of
knowledge is a growth into the truth. For this reason we have spoken of the Christian
theistic method as the method of implication into the truth of God. It is reasoning in a
spiral fashion rather than in a linear fashion. Accordingly, we have said that we can use
the old terms deduction and induction if only we remember that they must be thought of
as elements in this one process of implication into the truth of God. If we begin the
course of spiral reasoning at any point in the finite universe, as we must because that is
the proximate starting point of all reasoning, we can call the method of implication into
the truth of God a transcendental method. That is, we must seek to determine what
presuppositions are necessary to any object of knowledge in order that it may be
intelligible to us. It is not as though we already know some facts and laws to begin with,
irrespective of the existence of God, in order then to reason from such a beginning to
further conclusions. It is certainly true that if God has any significance for any object of
knowledge at all, the relation of God to that object of knowledge must be taken into
consideration from the outset. It is this fact that the transcendental method seeks to
recognize.
The charges made against this type of reasoning we must turn upon those who made
them. It will be said of this type of reasoning that it introduces the subjective element of
belief in God, which all men do not share. Of this we can only say that all men should
share that belief, and before the fall of man into sin man did have that belief. Belief in
God is the most human attitude conceivable. It is abnormal not to believe in God. We
must therefore hold that only the Christian theist has real objectivity, while the others are
introducing false prejudices, or subjectivity.
The charge is made that we engage in circular reasoning. Now if it be called circular
reasoning when we hold it necessary to presuppose the existence of God, we are not
ashamed of it because we are firmly convinced that all forms of reasoning that leave God
out of account will end in ruin. Yet we hold that our reasoning cannot fairly be called
circular reasoning, because we are not reasoning about and seeking to explain facts by
assuming the existence and meaning of certain other facts on the same level of being with
the facts we are investigating, and then explaining these facts in turn by the facts with
which we began. We are presupposing God, not merely another fact of the universe. If
God is to come into contact with us at all it is natural that the initiative must be with him.
And this will also apply to the very question about the relation of God to us. Accordingly,
it is only on God’s own testimony that we can know anything about him.
Even in paradise it was God’s verbal self-disclosure, and the disclosure of his will for
man’s activity in relation to the created cosmos, that was indispensable for man’s ability
to identify any fact and to relate any fact properly to any other fact. Applying this to the
Scripture, it is but natural that we should accept the Scripture testimony about itself. If we
did anything else we would not be accepting Scripture as absolute. The only alternative
then to bringing in a God who testifies of himself and upon whose testimony we are
wholly dependent, is not to bring in God at all. And not to bring in God at all spells
nothing but utter ruin for knowledge. In that case knowledge may be said to be reduced to
the pass of drawing circles in a void. Hence we must return the charge of circular
reasoning to those who made it. On the other hand, we are happy to accept the charge of
circular reasoning. Our reasoning frankly depends upon the revelation of God, whose
“reasoning” is within the internal-eternal circularity of the three persons of the Trinity. It
is only if we frankly depend for the validity of our reasoning upon this internal circular
reasoning in the triune God that we can escape trying in vain to reason in circles in a
vacuum of pure contingency.
The charge has been made that it is an a priori procedure to bring in God at the
beginning of the process of knowledge. This too is a charge that acts as a boomerang. A
priori reasoning is reasoning that does not start with the facts. Now antitheism has
arbitrarily taken for granted that God is not a fact, and that if he is a fact that fact does not
have any bearing upon the other facts. This we must hold to be an a priori procedure. We
hold that the so-called “facts” are wholly unintelligible unless the supreme fact of God be
brought into relation with them. We are willing to start with any fact as a proximate
starting point, but refuse to admit before the investigation has begun that there can be no
such fact as God.
Summing up, we may observe that all the various methods of investigation that have
been advanced may be used theistically or they may be used antitheistically, according as
God is taken into or is left out of consideration at the outset. Perhaps the best way to
bring out this point is to say that antitheistic thinking uses all these methods univocally,
while theism uses all these methods analogically. We need not take much time to discuss
what is meant by these terms. The meaning may be inferred from our discussion of the
starting point of knowledge. There we saw how antitheistic thinking was constantly
taking for granted that its position was correct. It did this by taking for granted that the
object and the subject of knowledge exist apart from God and can come into fruitful
relations with one another without any reference to God. Therewith antitheistic thinking
reduced God, if he was later to be taken into consideration at all, to a quantitative
addition to man. This quantitative addition may take any of three forms. First, God may
be taken as one fact among others. It is this that the first method of Platonic reasoning,
that is, the outspokenly empirical method of reasoning, allows for. In the second place,
God may be thought of as a logical universal in the particulars. It is this that the second
method of Platonic reasoning allows for. In the third place, God may be identified with
the Whole of Reality inclusive of both the temporal and the eternal. It is this that the third
method of Platonic reasoning allows for. In every case, it is taken for granted that God
can, in the nature of the case, be no more than at most a correlative to man.
Since antitheistic thinking takes this univocal method of reasoning to be so evidently
the only possible method of reasoning, since univocal reasoning is the reasoning of “the
natural man,” which he will not and cannot forsake till he is no longer a “natural man”
but a regenerated man, the one thing of importance to remember is that we must set over
against this natural man not something that is a little modification of that which he
already holds. We must hold before him the necessity of a total reversal of his attitude of
mind. It is this that Paul did when he preached the gospel to the wise men of Athens,
steeped as they were in Plato and Aristotle. The Christian epistemologists have been all
too remiss in fearing to follow Paul’s example boldly. They have feared that they would
have no results if they were thus fearless in their approach. Yet if anything would seem to
follow from the Christian position as a whole, it is that we could expect no results at all
unless bold measures be taken. If the whole head is sick and the whole heart faint, it is
not a snuffbox that is needed, but a lively stimulant. If men are dead in their sins and
trespasses they are dead epistemologically too, and no demonstration of health will do
any good, but only the gift of new life. Accordingly, we must reason in such a way that
the Holy Spirit can give life through our reasoning as an avenue.
Our reasoning then must always and everywhere be truly analogical It matters not
whether we are reasoning inductively or deductively, whether we analyze or synthesize,
whether we reason in a priori or a posteriori fashion, If we only reason analogically we
are true to our principle and may expect results, and if we do not reason analogically we
are not true to our principle and may not expect any results.
The necessity of reasoning analogically is always implied in the theistic conception of
God. If God is to be thought of at all as necessary for man’s interpretation of the facts or
objects of knowledge, he must be thought of as being determinative of the objects of
knowledge. In other words, he must then be thought of as the only ultimate interpreter,
and man must be thought of as a finite reinterpreter. Since, then, the absolute self-
consciousness of God is the final interpreter of all facts, man’s knowledge is analogical
of God’s knowledge. Since all the finite facts exist by virtue of the interpretation of God,
man’s interpretation of the finite facts is ultimately dependent upon God’s interpretation
of the facts. Man cannot, except to his own hurt, look at the facts without looking at
God’s interpretation of the facts. Man’s knowledge of the facts is then a reinterpretation
of God’s interpretation. It is this that is meant by saying that man’s knowledge is
analogical of God’s knowledge.
We must now consider more fully the question how one who has thus become
convinced that analogical reasoning is the only type of reasoning that gives us truth at all,
must face one who is convinced that univocal reasoning is the only type of reasoning that
can possibly bring one into contact with truth.
In the preceding chapter we have seen that the point of contact that we may
presuppose is that man, as a matter of fact, never exists in such independence as he thinks
he does. He remains accessible to God always It is this that gives us courage to proceed.
And with this conviction we proceed with assurance of success. It is this that gives us
courage not to condescend to any form of univocal reasoning.
When we approach the question in this way we should be willing to start anywhere
and with any fact that any person we meet is interested in. The very conviction that there
is not a single fact that can really be known unless it is interpreted theistically gives us
this liberty to start anywhere, as far as a proximate starting point is concerned. If we
thought that the fact of God’s existence had no significance for physics, we would have
to seek to bring our opponents at once into contact with the more specifically religious
problem. But that is exactly what we need not do. We can start with any fact at all and
challenge “our friends the enemy,” to give us an intelligible interpretation of it.
Since the non-theist is so heartily convinced that univocal reasoning is the only
possible kind of reasoning, we must ask him to reason univocally for us in order that we
may see the consequences. In other words, we believe it to be in harmony with and a part
of the process of reasoning analogically with a non-theist that we ask him to show us first
what he can do. We may, to be sure, offer to him at once a positive statement of our
position. But this he will at once reject as quite out of the question. So we may ask him to
give us something better. The reason he gives for rejecting our position is, in the last
analysis, that it involves self-contradiction. We see again as an illustration of this charge
the rejection of the theistic conception that God is absolute and that he has nevertheless
created this world for his glory. This, the non-theist says, is self-contradictory. And it no
doubt is, from a non-theistic point of view. But the final question is not whether a
statement appears to be contradictory. The final question is in which framework or on
which view of reality—the Christian or the nonChristian—the law of contradiction can
have application to any fact. The non-Christian rejects the Christian view out of hand as
being contradictory. Then when he is asked to furnish a foundation for the law of
contradiction, he can offer nothing but the idea of contingency.
What we shall have to do then is to try to reduce our opponent’s position to an
absurdity. Nothing less will do. Without God, man is completely lost in every respect,
epistemologically as well as morally and religiously. But exactly what do we mean by
reducing our opponent’s position to an absurdity? He thinks he has already reduced our
position to an absurdity by the simple expedient just spoken of. But we must point out to
him that upon a theistic basis our position is not reduced to an absurdity by indicating the
“logical difficulties” involved in the conception of creation. Upon the theistic basis it
must be contended that the human categories are but analogical of God’s categories, so
that it is to be expected that human thought will not be able to comprehend how God
shall be absolute and at the same time create the universe for his glory. If taken on the
same level of existence, it is no doubt a self-contradiction to say that a thing is full and at
the same time is being filled. But it is exactly this point that is in question—whether God
is to be thought of as on the same level with man. What the antitheist should have done is
to show that even upon a theistic basis our conception of creation involves self-
contradiction.
We must therefore give our opponents better treatment than they give us. We must
point out to them that univocal reasoning itself leads to self-contradiction, not only from
a theistic point of view, but from a non-theistic point of view as well. It is this that we
ought to mean when we say that we must meet our enemy on their own ground. It is this
that we ought to mean when we say that we reason from the impossibility of the contrary.
The contrary is impossible only if it is self-contradictory when operating on the basis of
its own assumptions. It is this too that we should mean when we say that we are arguing
ad hominem. We do not really argue ad hominem unless we show that someone’s
position involves self-contradiction, and there is no self-contradiction unless one’s
reasoning is shown to be directly contradictory of or to lead to conclusions which are
contradictory of one’s own assumptions.
It will be seen that when we reason ad hominem or when we say that we place
ourselves upon our opponent’s position we are still reasoning analogically. We would not
be reasoning analogically if we really placed ourselves upon our opponent’s position.
Then we would, with him, have to reason univocally, and we would drown with him. We
use the figure of drowning in order to suggest what it is that we really do when we say
that we are placing ourselves upon someone else’s position. We may then compare
ourselves to a lifesaver who goes out to save someone from drowning. Such a lifesaver
must be bound to the shore to which he wants to rescue the other party. He may depend
upon his power to swim, but this very power to swim is an invisible cord that connects
him to the shore. Similarly, if we reason when we place ourselves upon our opponents’
position, we cannot for a moment do more than argue thus for “argument’s sake.”
When we reason thus we are not reasoning on the basis of some abstract law of self-
contradiction. We have seen that the very question between theists and antitheists is as to
the foundation of the law of contradiction. When they criticize our position and think
they have reduced it to the place where it falls under the law of self-contradiction, we do
not give in to defeat or appeal to irrationality in the name of faith, but we challenge their
interpretation of the law of contradiction. We hold that they have falsely assumed that the
self-contradictory is to be identified with that which is beyond the comprehension of
man. But this takes for granted that human categories are ultimate categories—which is
just the thing in question. We must maintain that we have the true conception of the law
of contradiction. According to that conception, only that is self-contradictory which is
contradictory to the conception of the absolute self-consciousness of God. If there were in
the Trinity such a self-contradiction, there would also be in the matter of God’s relation
to the world. But, since the Trinity is the conception by which ultimate unity and
diversity is brought into equal ultimacy, it is this conception of the Trinity which makes
self-contradiction impossible for God and therefore also impossible for man. Complete
self-contradiction is possible only in hell, and hell is itself a self-contradiction because it
feeds eternally on the negation of an absolute affirmation. Accordingly, we must hold
that the position of our opponent has in reality been reduced to self-contradiction when it
is shown to be hopelessly opposed to the Christian theistic concept of God. Yet in order
to bring this argument as closely to the non-regenerate consciousness as we may, we
must seek to show that the non-theist is self-contradictory upon his own assumptions, as
well as upon the assumption of the truth of theism, and that he cannot even be self-
contradictory upon a non-theistic basis, since if he saw himself to be self-contradictory he
would be self-contradictory no longer.
Now when this method of reasoning from the impossibility of the contrary is carried
out, there is really nothing more to do. We realize this if we call to mind again that if
once it is seen that the conception of God is necessary for the intelligible interpretation of
any fact, it will be seen that this is necessary for all facts and for all laws of thought. If
one really saw that it is necessary to have God in order to understand the grass that grows
outside his window, he would certainly come to a saving knowledge of Christ, and to the
knowledge of the absolute authority of the Bible. It is true, we grant that it is not usually
in this way that men become true Christian theists, but we put it in this way in order to
bring out clearly that the investigation of any fact whatsoever will involve a discussion of
the meaning of Christianity as well as of theism, and a sound position taken on the one
involves a sound position on the other. It is well to emphasize this fact because there are
Fundamentalists who tend to throw overboard all epistemological and metaphysical
investigation and say that they will limit their activities to preaching Christ. But we see
that they are not really preaching Christ unless they are preaching him for what he wants
to be, namely, the Christ of cosmic significance. Nor can they even long retain the
soteriological significance of Christ if they forsake his cosmological significance. If one
allows that certain facts may be truly known apart from God in Christ, there is no telling
where the limit will be. It soon appears that the elephant wants to warm more than his
nose. He will soon claim that the truths of the religious consciousness may also be known
apart from Christ, and may therefore become the standard of what is to be accepted of the
Bible.
In this connection we must also say a word about the contention often made by
Christians that we must be positive rather than negative in our presentation of the truth to
those who have not yet accepted it. We have no fault to find with this statement if it be
correctly understood. We must certainly present the truth of the Christian theistic system
constantly, at every point of the argument. But it is clear that if you offer a new wife to
one who is perfectly satisfied with the one he has now, you are not likely to be relieved of
your burden. In other words, it is the self-sufficiency of the “natural man” that must first
be brought under some pressure, before there is any likelihood of his even considering
the truth in any serious fashion at all. The parable of the prodigal helps us here. As long
as the son was at home there was nothing but a positive argument that was held before
him. But he wanted to go out of the father’s house in order to indulge in “riotous living.”
Not till he was at the swinetrough, not till he saw that he had made a hog of himself and
that he could not be a hog because he was a man, did he at all begin to consider the
servants of his father who had plenty of bread. The kingdom of God must be built upon
the destruction of the enemy. God increases his plagues upon those that “dwell upon the
earth” in order to make them think analogically. And though they cry for the mountains
and the hills to fall upon them rather than turn to him that chastizes them, yet God
continues to increase the weight of his plagues. Now this is more than an analogy.
Univocal reasoning is itself a part of the manifestation of sin. Hence it too must be
destroyed. And if it is destroyed the natural result is analogical reasoning. And it matters
not how far may seem the way, once one reasons analogically one will arrive at the
father’s house at last. The far country into which the prodigal had gone and where he
thought he was beyond the father’s control was nevertheless the father’s country, and the
father was “pulling the strings” there.
It is this, it will be noticed, that leads us to victory. If it were not true that it is the
father who “pulls the strings,” we would reason in vain. For we need not flatter ourselves
that even if the non-theist be shown that his position is self-contradictory in the sense that
it contradicts his own assumptions and breaks to pieces his own law of contradiction, he
will turn from his ways of himself. Instead, he will conclude that man must remain in
such complete irrationality, rather than turn to analogical reasoning. The miracle of
regeneration has to occur somewhere, and all that we are arguing for is that we must ask
where it is that the Holy Spirit will most likely perform this miracle. And then there can
be no doubt but that the likelihood is in favor of that place where the non-theist has to
some extent seen the emptiness and vanity of his own position.
Similar to the contention that we must be positive rather than negative in our
presentation of the truth to those who believe otherwise than we do, is the statement often
made that we must present Christianity as an hypothesis which men are to try in the
interpretation of the facts of experience. One form of this contention appears when
preachers appeal to men to take Christ because he will satisfy them best. Now it goes
without saying that a drunkard cannot be tempted into accepting Christ in this way if it be
understood as meaning nothing more than that the drunkard is himself, as he is, to be the
judge of what really satisfies him. But it is exactly this that the preacher does not want.
He wants the drunkard to allow Jesus to tell him what satisfies him, and if he does, then
Jesus will satisfy him. Similarly we may certainly present Christianity as an hypothesis if
we do it while reasoning with our opponents in an ad hominem fashion, i.e., if we allow
him to try what he can make of Christianity as an hypothesis among many by the process
of univocal reasoning. He will then soon find that if he is going to accept Christianity he
must give up the idea of treating it as an hypothesis and ask forgiveness for having done
so. On the other hand, if he continues to regard Christianity as one hypothesis among
many, it is a foregone conclusion that he will not accept this hypothesis rather than
another. And if he did accept Christianity as the most likely hypothesis, he would not be
accepting Christianity, but a substitute for it. To reason about anything as an hypothesis
for the explanation of any fact or facts means that there may be other hypotheses that
should eventually prove to be true. And if it is conceivable that an interpretation other
than God should finally be given for the facts of the universe, then it is also true that
these facts are now considered as being apart from God. So then our conclusion must be
that if we present Christian theism as an hypothesis, it must always be done by us as a
part of our analogical reasoning process, even if it be at that point where we are reasoning
for argument’s sake.
Chapter 16:
A Sample Of Christian Theistic Argument
What remains to be done is to take a couple samples of antitheistic thought in our day
and seek to show roughly in what way the method of reasoning is applicable to them. It is
neither possible nor necessary to review in detail all the leading philosophers or
philosophical movements of the day. The argument must be the same in principle with all
the various forms of antitheistic speculation. All that we shall seek to do is first to take a
most extreme form and then a less extreme form of antitheistic thought and to reason
briefly with them.
Naturally, the main point in dispute is whether our opponents can get along without
God. All of our opponents have said in effect that human categories are ultimate. With
respect to all of them we would then ask what happens if they seek to face the more
ultimate questions of philosophy on this basis.
We can for convenience divide the forces of the enemy into two camps. There are
those who openly say that they can do without God, and there are those who covertly say
they can do without God. Those who openly say that they can do without God we shall
classify as Pragmatists, and those who covertly say they can do without God we shall
classify as Idealists. It should be understood that these terms as we use them are more
inclusive than the names would indicate. We use the name Pragmatist to indicate first of
all the pragmatic movement in philosophy today, but also all of those who believe in the
so-called open universe. Under this class we may therefore mention New Realism,
Neorealism, Critical Realism, Pan Objectivism, the ordinary evolutionist, the ordinary
scientist depending on the so-called scientific or empirical method of research, whether in
the field of physics, biology or psychology, and many others. All of these and many other
nuances of modern thought and scientific method have this in common—that they
naively take for granted that the “facts” are there as ultimates from which we must begin
our research. The object and the subject of knowledge are taken for granted without the
question of reference to God. It is assumed, therefore, that human categories are in
themselves quite able to interpret reality. This is once more the first method of Platonic
reasoning. There may be those among these and similar groups who still speak of God,
but what they mean is a finite God, a primus inter pares, a one among many. We are not
interested in denying that they have some kind of God; we only maintain that they have
not God, and are not afraid to say so if one makes plain that by God he means the
Christian concept of God.
We must therefore briefly seek to understand what the consequences are if one takes
this position to the bitter end. First we should notice, however, that there are all too many
who are not willing to accept the responsibility for their epistemological attitude. There
are perhaps more epistemological loafers than any other kind. We see them in those who
say we cannot be sure about this question of whether the Bible is a revelation of God. We
see them in the ordinary medical man who says that he does not wish to be dogmatic,
because nobody knows. In Scripture this attitude is exemplified in Ahab’s time when men
were taught that Baal and Jehovah were equally valuable. So today many parents are
willing to have their children attend Sunday school because they ought to learn
something about religion. The religious tolerance that we find Modernism advocating
today is based upon this epistemological indifference and ignorance, rather than upon any
broadmindedness. Indifferentists of this sort are hard to deal with. To some extent, it is a
matter of temperament. Yet where it is based upon temperament we should attempt to
have them see that they may not indulge in any sort of temperament they please. They are
rational beings, and should ask themselves questions about the rationale of their
temperaments. In such extreme cases the only method that may approach their thought at
all is a vigorous testimony to one’s own convictions about the truth of Christianity, and
specifically its implications with respect to the judgment day. If they are too intellectually
lethargic to do any thinking on their own account, if they have so far succeeded in
drowning the voice of humanity within them, there seems to be nothing left to do but to
testify. In a sense, of course, the whole presentation of the Christian theistic system to
those who believe it not is a matter of testimony. But we mean here testimony that is no
more than a vigorous statement of one’s belief of the truth without expediting any
immediate intellectual response. Testimony to such and prayer about such is about all that
we can do. It may be that our testimony and our prayer will lead them to begin some
intellectual operation of some sort, so that we may begin to reason with them.
In the second place we should notice that there are thousands who do not engage in
intellectual consideration of the truth to any great extent, not so much because they are
necessarily indifferent to such things by nature as because they are unsuited to it. With
respect to these, it is obvious that it would be useless to present the intellectual argument
for Christian theism in any subtle and detailed form. Nor is this necessary. A simple
presentation of the truth in positive form, and once more largely by way of testimony,
may be all that is required. Christianity is not for a few elite intellectualists. Its message is
to the simple and to the learned. The argument must therefore be adapted to each one’s
mental capacity. And it should not be forgotten that the difference between the learned
and the unlearned is, after all, very small when it comes to a consideration of ultimate
questions. The learned may have many more facts at his disposal and be more skilled in
the use of the syllogism, but when it comes to a consideration of the meaning of any one
fact or of all facts put together, all this refinement does not bring him very far. Many a
man of ordinary intelligence can reason with himself about the reasonableness of thinking
of the existence of the facts apart from God, as well as the most learned scholar. To say
this is not to disparage scholarship. Scholarship is necessary in its place, but it is not
necessary for every man.
In the third place, there are many who are avowed agnostics. These are not
intellectually indifferent or unable. On the contrary, they are often very sophisticated.
They are the men with a little learning, which is a dangerous thing. They may be experts
in the field of medicine and daubers in the field of epistemology. They will tell you that it
is patent that nobody knows anything about the origin of matter and of life, and that it is
therefore a conceit to say that he does. They therefore think it to be truly humble to say
that they do not know. It is this attitude that underlies much of present-day scientific
method which wants to limit its investigations to the facts and draw no great conclusions
from them about ultimate matters.
This attitude is usually coupled with the felt or stated assurance that, after all, man
has no metaphysical need. All that man needs is to get along for his three score years and
ten in the environment in which he finds himself. He may wonder what is going to
happen after this life, but he surely need not worry about it because it is certain that he
can do nothing about it.
With such as these it would seem that the point we should be most anxious to drive
home is that in trying to be agnostic, and in trying to say that they have no need of
metaphysics, they have already given one of the two possible answers to every question
of epistemology that may be asked. They have, as a matter of fact, said that all the facts—
or, in epistemological language, they have said that the object and the subject of
knowledge—exist apart from God and are able to get along without God. They think they
have said nothing at all about ultimate matters, while as a matter of fact they have in
effect said everything that could be said about them, and, we believe, more beside. They
have tried to be so modest that they did not dare to make a positive statement about
anything ultimate, while they have made a universal negative statement about the most
ultimate consideration that faces the mind of man. That this charge is fair is apparent
from the consideration of the opposite. Suppose that the object and the subject of
knowledge do not exist apart from God. Suppose, in other words, that the Christian
theistic conception of philosophy is true. In that case, it is not only possible to know
something about ultimate things, but in that case the knowledge of proximate things
depends upon the knowledge of ultimate things. In that case, not a single fact can be
known unless God is known.
What the present-day agnostic should do then is to make his position reasonable by
showing that God does not exist. The burden of the proof is upon him. He claims, of
course, that the burden of the proof is upon us when we hold that God exists. Yet this is
clearly not the case, since his own position, to be reasonable, must presuppose the non-
existence of God. If God does exist, man can know him, for the simple reason that in that
case all knowledge depends upon him. Hence an agnostic position must first prove that
God does not exist.
From these considerations it follows that agnosticism is completely self-
contradictory. And it is self-contradictory not only upon the assumption of the truth of
theism, but it is self-contradictory upon the assumption of the truth of antitheism, which
is the assumption of agnosticism. It is, in the first place, psychologically self-
contradictory upon its own assumptions. Agnosticism wants to hold that it is reasonable
to refrain from thorough epistemological speculations because they cannot lead to
anything. But in order to assume this attitude, agnosticism has itself made the most
tremendous intellectual assertion that could be made about ultimate things. In the second
place, agnosticism is epistemologically self-contradictory on its own assumptions
because its claim to make no assertion about ultimate reality rests upon a most
comprehensive assertion about ultimate reality. This is, of course, the point of pivotal
importance. It is hard to make men see that they have, as a matter of fact, in effect made a
universal statement about the whole of reality when they think that they have limited their
statements to only a few facts in their immediate vicinity. We should attempt to make
plain that the alternative is not between saying something about ultimate reality or not
saying anything about it, but that the alternative is rather between saying one thing about
it or another. Every human being, as a matter of fact, says something about ultimate
reality.
It should be noted that those who claim to say nothing about ultimate reality not only
do say something about it just as well as everybody else, but they have assumed for
themselves the responsibility of saying one definite thing about ultimate reality. They
have assumed the responsibility of excluding God. We have seen again that a God who is
to come in afterward is no God at all. Agnosticism cannot say that it is open-minded on
the question of the nature of ultimate reality. It is absolutely closed-minded on the
subject. It has one view that it cannot, unless its own assumption be denied, exchange for
another. It has started with the assumption of the non-existence of God and must end with
it. Its so-called open-minded attitude is therefore a closed-minded attitude. The agnostic
must be openminded and closed-minded at the same time. And this is not only a
psychological self-contradiction, but an epistemological self-contradiction. It amounts to
affirmation and denial at the same time. Accordingly, they cancel out one another, if
there is cancelation power in them. But the predication of agnosticism cannot be said to
have cancelation power unless the whole antitheistic system be first proved true. And the
whole position could never be proved true because every fact would have to be in before
the agnostic should be willing to make any statement about any other fact, since one fact
may influence other facts. Now since clearly no individual agnostic can hope to live till
all the facts are in, every individual agnostic must die with an “open” mind and at the
same time with a closed mind on the subject of God’s existence. On his death bed he
must make not one, but two pronouncements. He cannot say science has no
pronouncements to make and let it go at that. He must make first a universal negative
statement which, we have seen, is involved in his agnostic position. Then he must at the
same time be completely open-minded on the question of God’s existence. He must say
that there cannot be a judgment, and at the same time he must look around the corner for
it as the next fact that might, for all his own position allows him to hold, appear. The only
way, then, that the agnostic can seek to harmonize his mutually exclusive statements that
he finds himself constantly making about ultimate reality is to hold that none of them
mean anything because all of them operate in a void. And he could not say anything
about the void unless there were something beyond the void. In other words, he cannot
argue for the truth of the agnostic or the generally non-theistic position except upon the
assumption of the truth of the Christian theistic system.
It is on this wise, then, that we shall have to deal with agnosticism. We can first show
that it is self-contradictory since Christian theism is true. Then we must show that it is
self-contradictory if antitheism were true. And finally we must show that it would not
even have power to show itself self-contradictory upon its own assumption unless theism
is true. The antitheistic conception of the self-contradictory presupposes the theistic
conception of the self-contradictory for its operation.
Incidentally, we may point out that, in addition to being psychologically and
epistemologically self-contradictory, the agnostic is morally self-contradictory. His
contention was that he is very humble, and for that reason unwilling to pretend to know
anything about ultimate matters. Yet he has by implication made a universal statement
about reality. He therefore not only claims to know as much as the theist knows, but he
claims to know much more. More than that, he not only claims to know much more than
the theist, but he claims to know more than the theist’s God. He has boldly set bare
possibility above the theist’s God and is quite willing to test the consequences of his
action. It is thus that the hubris of which the Greeks spoke so much, and upon which they
invoked the wrath of the gods, appears in new and seeming innocent garb.
Agnosticism of the type criticized is characteristic of all the movements in physics,
biology, psychology and philosophy spoken of above. Not all of them are usually spoken
of as agnostics, because many of them claim to know about finite things even if they
disclaim knowledge of ultimate things. But it is itself a sign of agnosticism not to classify
as agnostics not only all who disclaim knowledge about ultimate reality, but also all those
who claim to have knowledge about finite matters without having knowledge about God.
The assumption of those who say they are not agnostic about finite things, but only about
God, is that finite things can be known apart from God. From the Christian theistic point
of view, such as claim knowledge of finite things and disclaim knowledge of God are as
much agnostics as those who disclaim knowledge of both. This is involved in our
argument which showed that to attempt to know a finite object apart from God involves
one in self-contradiction upon one’s own assumptions.
It may be well, however, to look a little further at the position of those who disclaim
agnosticism because they believe they have sufficient knowledge of finite matters
without reference to God.
The first thing for us to note is that the argument between the epistemological monists
and dualists does not interest us directly. This debate rages in the field of psychology
between those who maintain that the human mind is but an aspect of physical reality in
general, and those who try to make it very distinct. Whether one be a Behaviorist or a
Configurationist or a Hormist does not make a great deal of difference for our purpose. It
is not mechanism or Monism as such, nor is it subjectivism or interactionism as such, that
we are fighting, but the antitheism of any and all of them. Apologists often make much of
the psychology of McDougal, as over against Behaviorism, etc., as valuable for the
establishment of the truth of Christianity. Now it is true that if Behaviorism were proved
true, Christianity would be disproved, but it is equally true that if McDougal’s position
were proved, Christianity would be disproved. Nor can it really be said that any one
position is fundamentally nearer to theism than another. To be sure, we would not
minimize the fact that materialisms of all sorts are more crass forms of opposition to
Christianity than all sorts of spiritualism, but this should never blind us to the fact that
any who misses a train by a step misses it just as well as he who misses it by a mile. And
it is sometimes very difficult to make those who have a position that approaches
Christianity in form see that, after all, they do not have Christianity. Accordingly, when
we see the same struggle in the field of psychology, we do not rejoice too greatly if the
philosophical temper of the time be away from the extreme forms of Materialism and
Monism of some years ago. J. B. Pratt in his book Adventures in Philosophy and
Religion, argues for a dualistic position over against the Idealist, the Pragmatist, the
Neorealist, the New Realist, the Behaviorist, and Russell. We can only remark that we
must include Pratt himself in the list and then begin our argument against all of them on
essentially the same point, that is, that they have taken for granted that the object and the
subject of knowledge exist and can come into relation with one another without taking
God into consideration. We cannot agree with the attitude taken by Charles Harris that,
since there has been a reaction against some of the more extreme forms of materialism,
etc., there is now no serious opponent to Christianity in the field of philosophy today. He
holds that because the contingency of the universe has become “an accepted
philosophical doctrine” there is not much else to fear. 1 We hold that if it is true that the
contingency of the universe is an established philosophic doctrine, then philosophy is as
much opposed to Christianity as ever Materialism was, since it then leaves God’s plan
out of consideration.
If God is left out of the picture it is up to the human mind to furnish the unity that
must bind together the diversity of factual existence. It will not do to think of laws
existing somehow apart from the mind. And even if this were possible it would not help
matters any, because even these laws would be thought of as independent of God and as
just there somehow. In other words, the only alternative to thinking of God as the
ultimate source of the unity of human experience as it is furnished by laws or universals
is to think that the unity rests in a void. Every object of knowledge must, therefore, be
thought of as being surrounded by ultimate irrationality. It is this that is involved in the
position A. E. Taylor represents when he constantly avers that there is a surd in
everything historical or temporal, that is, in all factual existence. On the other hand, if the
more subjective position be taken, it is the human mind that furnishes the universal
element of experience, and the human mind must itself be thought of as swimming in a
void.
In the second place, it should be noticed that if the object and the subject must both be
thought of as somehow being in the void, it is inconceivable that there should be any
relation of any sort between them. Aristotle admitted to being baffled at the question of
the infima species, i.e., the relation of the individual to the lowest universal. There he
found ultimate mystery. On the one hand you cannot say that the individual is subsumed
under the species entirely, lest there be nothing but species, and the whole individual
disappear. On the other hand, you cannot have complete individuality without bringing
the individual into relation with others. Aristotle therefore admitted that, as far as he
could see, the relation of the individual and species, or the relation of the fact to law,
remained a mystery. And since the day of Aristotle there has not been any advance made
on this score, because modern philosophy has continued to build upon the same
assumption that Greek philosophy built upon, namely, that all things are at bottom one
and return unto one. If there is to be any relation between the one and the many, it must
be, according to all non-theistic thought, a relation of identity, and if identity is seen to
lead to the destruction of knowledge, the diversity that is introduced is thought of as
being ultimate. In other words, according to all non-theistic thinking, the facts and the
laws that are supposed to bind the facts together into unity are first thought of as existing
independently of one another and are afterward patched together. It is taken for granted
that the temporal is the ultimate source of diversity. Accordingly, Reality is said to be
essentially synthetic. The real starting point is then an ultimate plurality. And an ultimate
plurality without an equally ultimate unity will forever remain a plurality. It is this that is
especially apparent in all forms of pragmatic thought. There the necessity of having any
such ultimate unity is openly denied. And the only way we can meet that contention is to
show that by denying ultimate unity they have also denied to themselves the possibility of
having a proximate unity. There is no guarantee that the human mind can in any sense
know reality that is near unless it knows reality that is far away. For all I know, the next
fact that I must adjust to a previous fact is a fatal automobile accident. How then do I
1
 cf. his Pro Fide, p. 18.
know that it is not the most pragmatically valuable thing for me to know whether the fact
of death does not immediately connect me with another fact, namely, the judgment?
It is clear that upon pragmatic basis, and for that matter upon antitheistic basis in
general, there can be no object-object relation, i.e., there can be no philosophy of nature,
so that the sciences become impossible, and no philosophy of history, so that the past
cannot be brought into relation with the present nor the future with the present. Then
there can be no subject-object relation, so that even if it were conceivable that there were
such a thing as nature and history, I would be doomed to ignorance of it. In the third
place, there can be no subject-subject relation, so that even if there were such a thing as
nature and history, and even if I knew about it, I could never speak to anyone else about
it. There would be Babylonian confusion.
It should be remembered in this connection that when we say that all non-theistic
thought ends in Babylonian confusion, this conclusion is not contradicted by the obvious
fact that there are sciences, and that there is philosophy in history, and that there is
communication of thought on all these subjects. We grant that all these things are there
after a fashion. We maintain, however, and this is in entire harmony with the whole
theistic position, that all these things as they are and as far as they are what they ought to
be, exist by the common grace of God which has not allowed matters to work themselves
out to their logical conclusion on this earth. For this reason, it is entirely consistent for a
Christian to take the position that we have taken with respect to the more fundamental
question of the relation of the two mutually exclusive life and world views, and at the
same time be interested in and cooperate with scientists and historians who are opposed
to the theistic system by virtue of the presuppositions. The biblical analogy that serves
our purpose here is that of Solomon hiring foreign help for the building of the temple. In
the case of the Samaritans who wished to help the Jews rebuild the temple, it was the
business of the true Jew to reject the offer. In the case of the Phoenicians, it was the
privilege and the duty of the true Jew to accept the service. The difference is simply that
in the case of the Samaritans there was an effort to have a voice in the interpretation of
the plans of God for his temple. On the other hand, in the case of the Phoenicians there
was no such attempt. There it was no more than a case of skilled workmanship. And
skilled workmanship is often, by God’s common grace, found more abundantly in the
camp of the antitheists than in the camp of the theists.
Our conclusion then must be that the various devotees of the open universe, who take
for granted that the human mind can furnish all the universals that the facts require, must
be regarded as having reduced human experience to an absurdity.
We now turn briefly to a second group of thinkers who, like the first, openly avow
that God is unnecessary for the interpretation of experience but who, in distinction from
the first, want to interpret reality in eternal instead of in temporal categories. These will
be recognized as those who have reasoned after the second Platonic method of reasoning.
McTaggart’s position may be taken as typical. We have already intimated that there are
in modern times very few of this kind of philosopher, because in modern times not only
the reality of time, but the ultimacy of time, has been greatly emphasized. Yet it is
important to call attention to them because it gives the opportunity to point out that their
position as well as that of the outspoken temporalists is one of complete relativity which
must lead to the annihilation of human experience.
It will be noted that in the case of McTaggart, too, it makes no difference whether he
continues to use the name of God. The question is what he means by the term. And the
thing he means by it is a logical universal in the particulars. The God who fits in with a
temporalistic position is a finite god; the God who fits in with McTaggart’s position is a
logical universal. In the first case we have temporal relativity; in this case we have logical
correlativity.
The essential difficulty that this position faces is at bottom the same difficulty that the
Pragmatist faced, namely, the problem of the relation of the particular to the universal. In
a bold effort McTaggart has eternized all the particulars of time in order to satisfy the
logical demand for an equal ultimacy of the principles of unity and diversity. In this
respect his position is to be preferred to that of Pragmatism, which has become quite
insensible to this most fundamental need of human thought. Yet the position of
McTaggart remains one in which the principles of unity and diversity are not really made
equally ultimate. Even if every human being be eternized as he has been eternized by
McTaggart, he is not therewith made as comprehensive as all others and as the universal.
McTaggart does not pretend that every individual is as comprehensive as the universal
that binds the individuals together. He conceives of ultimate reality as a society of
individuals. It will be seen that the conception of the Trinity can in no way be compared
to this. And this is so not so much because in the Christian doctrine of the Trinity there
are only three persons, but because the persons of the Trinity are thought of as being each
of them as comprehensive as the Godhead. It is only thus that unity and diversity are
really made equally ultimate. And such a union could not be effected between a logical
principle and human individuals, If human individuals are called upon to furnish the
ultimate element of diversity in reality, there will be an element of inequality between the
principle of unity which is thought of as comprehensive, and the principle of diversity
which is not thought of as comprehensive of all reality. And so the problem of the infima
species faces us once more. In this case one can perhaps have his choice between
emphasizing the particulars and landing in an ultimate pluralism, or emphasizing the
universal and landing in a stark identity.
In order to relate our argument here to the discussion given on method, we point out
that the position of McTaggart results in self-contradiction on his own assumptions,
because the difficulties that Plato found have not been overcome. Plato found that if he
attempted to explain the world of sense wholly by the world of Ideas he could not
account for the Ideas of mud, and hair, and filth. What he meant by this was that he had
to find unity among the various Ideas of the Ideal world, and in order to get unity he
could not allow good and evil to become equally ultimate. Either the one or the other had
to rule. And if he made the one to rule over the other he had once more the problem of
gradation on his hands, in order to escape which he had turned to the Ideal world for the
explanation of the sense world. If he introduced gradation, unity and diversity would be
equally ultimate. On the other hand, if he refused to introduce the gradation idea he
would have to make good and evil correlatives of one another, and therewith the one
would cancel the other. We have seen how this worked out in the case of the logic of
Bosanquet. In his attempt to make analysis and synthesis equally ultimate, he had to
attribute white and black at the same time to the same subject in the same way. Plato felt
this difficulty and gave up the effort in this line. McTaggart has not solved any of the
difficulties but will not give up the effort.
What McTaggart wants to do is to come to an absolute position. For this purpose he
seeks to absolutize man as far as possible. But by seeking to absolutize man, he really
relativizes God. In his thought we have once more a contradiction similar to that which
we found in the Pragmatist’s position, namely, that he must at the same time look for the
absolute and the relative so that the terms cancel one another. Correlativity is not a
solution of the question of the relation of the absolute and the relative, but it is a cutting
of the Gordian knot. A complete relativism is once more the result. And whether this
relativism be conceived of as a temporal relativism as it is on a Pragmatist basis, or
whether it is conceived of on a logical basis makes no difference. Relativism reduces all
predication to a colorless mass. There would be no meaning to the conception of the
relative if it were not for the previous independent significance of the Absolute. The
result then is that the self-contradiction of McTaggart once more presupposes the truth of
Christian theism.
Finally, we must consider that group of thinkers who have not openly, but covertly,
denied the need of God. We have in mind the Idealist tradition in philosophy as we have
briefly reviewed it in some of its exponents in our discussion of the starting point of
epistemology. In them we recognize those who have tried to use the third method of
Platonic reasoning to solve the problems left unsolved by the first and second methods.
The third method was an attempt to bring into closer union the principles of unity and
diversity.
This Idealist tradition, we say, has covertly denied the necessity of God. As far as its
open statements are concerned, we have already had occasion to note that it makes very
strong assertions about the necessity of having an absolute. Yet we saw that as a matter of
fact, Idealism took for granted that the human consciousness can function independently
of God.
Our argument can be very brief. If it is true that the Idealist has assumed that the
human consciousness can function independently of God, his position is open to exactly
the same criticism as the position of the Pragmatist.
Suppose then that we take the position of Taylor or of Bowne. By taking them as
illustrations we have the advantage that we can include the question of Christianity as
well as that of theism. If we can show that those who object to biblical authority cannot
stop till they have landed in the Pragmatist camp, it would seem that we have given the
best defense of the orthodox Christian position that can be given, inasmuch as it has been
pointed out that the Pragmatist position ends in self-contradiction. Our argument, then, is
that those who come apparently ever so near the Christian position but stop short or
maintaining the fundamental conceptions of an absolute Christ, an absolute Scripture, and
regeneration, reduce experience to an absurdity. This will no doubt seem an unnecessarily
extreme position. Many are tempted not to be so set on such matters as an absolute Bible.
They think they have therewith gained an apologetic advantage for themselves. To be
sure, it is true that we should never seek to defend more than it is strictly necessary to
defend. But our contention is exactly that it is strictly necessary to defend the
absoluteness of Scripture. If one does not defend the absoluteness of Scripture, one
cannot defend the absoluteness of Christ or of God. Nor is this closet logic that
evaporates before the exigencies of life, as Bowne maintains. The question in each case is
clearly that of the relation of the human consciousness to that which stands before it as
absolute. We have seen that if the human consciousness be thought of as at one point
functioning independently of the absolute before which it stands, there is no reason to
hope against hope that it will function otherwise than independently anywhere else. The
whole dispute between theism and antitheism as far as the subject of knowledge is
concerned is whether the human consciousness can or cannot function apart from God. If
we now conclude that it cannot function apart from God, then when it functions it is
wholly reinterpretative in its work. And if then, because of sin, the redemptive work of
God is necessary, as according to Christianity it is, it follows that when the human
consciousness functions in connection with this redemptive work of God, it must once
more be wholly reinterpretative and therefore be wholly submissive to the Absolute
interpretation which comes to it. Reasoning in the other direction, we may say that one
who will not make his thought reinterpretative in the case of Scripture deceives himself if
he thinks that he can nevertheless be reinterpretative of the thought of Christ or of God.
Turning to Taylor or Bowne’s argumentation, we say that their argument against the
idea of an absolute Scripture was that man must always at some point or other introduce a
subjective element. It makes no difference whether that subjective element comes in
when there is interpretation, or translation, or canonization, or even when there is
reception of revelation; it must come in at one or at several places. Now this argument,
we have pointed out, rests upon the antitheistic assumption that the human consciousness
can function independently of God to begin with. For this reason, it is impossible for
Bowne to stop short of the rejection of the atonement and the incarnation except as he
reduced these concepts themselves to the antitheistic level. From all this it follows, then,
that Bowne, as well as every Pragmatist, has set up a universal negative on the basis of
the independent action of his individual consciousness. Once the human consciousness is
thought of as independent of God in its operation anywhere, there is no stopping till all
the self-contradictions of Pragmatism rest upon its shoulders.
So then the whole argument between Christian theistic and antitheistic epistemology
stands before us. There is much that might still be discussed. It is possible to enter upon a
profitable discussion of many details. However, it was our purpose to speak of only the
most important matters.
These most important matters were somewhat as follows: first of all, we note the
necessity of seeing clearly that Christianity and theism are intricately interwoven. If one
is really a theist he cannot stop short of being a Christian, and Christianity cannot build
upon any foundation but that of a sound biblical theism. Accordingly, the argument must
constantly be for Christian theism as a whole. We cannot separate, except for the sake of
emphasis, between an argument for theism and an argument for Christianity. The
absoluteness of God and the inspiration of the Bible are involved in one another and one
cannot defend the one without defending the other.
In the second place, this whole Christian theistic position must be presented not as
something just a little or as a great deal better than other positions, but must be presented
as the only system of thought that does not destroy human experience to a meaningless
something. This is in accord with the teaching of the Bible that those who do not accept
Christ are lost. Accordingly, if Christian theism is defensible at all it must be defensible
in this way. And if it is not defensible in this way it is not defensible in any other way,
because any other way of defense reduces the uniqueness of Christianity at once. The
question is one of “this or nothing.”
The argument in favor of Christian theism must therefore seek to prove that if one is
not a Christian theist he knows nothing at all as he ought to know anything. The
difference is not that all men alike know certain things about the finite universe and that
some claim some additional knowledge, while the others do not. On the contrary, the
Christian theist must claim that he alone has true knowledge about cows and chickens as
well as about God. He does this in no spirit of conceit, because it is a gift of God’s grace.
Nor does he deny that there is knowledge after a fashion that enables the non-theist to get
along after a fashion in the world. This is the gift of God’s common grace, and therefore
does not change the absoluteness of the distinction made about the knowledge and the
ignorance of the theist and the non-theist respectively.
The method of argumentation will accord with the general position taken so far. It
will seek to show that antitheistic knowledge is self-contradictory on its own ground, and
that its conception of contradiction even presupposes the truth of Christian theism. It
must be the method of the impossibility of the contrary, or that of the destruction of the
enemy. It must show that univocal reasoning is self-destructive.
Meanwhile, Christian theism has the solemn duty to implicate itself ever more deeply
into the truth of God as it is revealed in nature and in Scripture till the end of time. It
must become ever more explicit in the formulation of what it sees to be the truth in order
that it may not lose its identity as time goes on, but the rather gain in its distinctiveness
and therefore in its testimony to the world. Magna est Veritas et praevalebit.
1
1
Van Til, Cornelius ; Sigward, Eric H.: The Works of Cornelius Van Til, 1895-1987.
electronic ed. New York : Labels Army Co., 1997
Appendix
When this syllabus was first completed, a copy was sent to Dr. J. Oliver Buswell, Jr.
Dr. Buswell did not agree with the approach presented in it. He was an ardent advocate of
the Butler Analogy approach in apologetics. Was not this the approach that was
employed by such great men as Charles Hodge, Benjamin Breckinridge Warfield, and
others? Buswell was certain that all intelligent presentation of the Christian position must
cease unless this Butler type of approach to apologetics was maintained.
Buswell said “If your oft-repeated statement is true in regard to the futility of the type
of apologetics represented by Dr. Wilson, then knowledge and reason fall to pieces
instantly when we begin to talk with an unbeliever.”
And what about “common grace”? “Do not your many admissions of the light of
intelligence by common grace in lost humanity give plenty of ground for the apologetic
method which you exclude?” (From a letter written January 30, 1937.)
My answer to Buswell’s criticism is found in the general argument of this syllabus. It
is to the effect that a Reformed theology requires a Reformed method of apologetics. The
Aquinas-Butler method presupposes that fallen man can and often does give an
essentially true interpretation of the world of space-time fact. His interpretation of nature
needs, on this view, only to be supplemented by redemptive revelation. And the natural
man can, and often does, see the need of such a revelation. Thus he may be, and often is,
favorably disposed toward the acceptance of the redemptive revelation of God in Christ
when it is presented to him as a fact.
However, Reformed exegetes of Scripture have clearly shown that the natural man
represses the truth of God wherever it comes to him. The natural man is not neutral in his
attitude toward any form of the revelation of God. He always gives a principially untrue
interpretation of all of God’s revelation. He does this because he hates God. Accordingly,
we labor in vain if we present the facts of God’s revelation to him and ask him to admit
that, on his own principle, he must admit that they reveal God. We can find no common
ground of interpretation with the natural man. He thinks that he knows the facts of the
universe in their proper relation to one another without taking God’s revelation in Christ
into account. The truth is that only he who sees the facts of the world in the light of God’s
redemptive revelation given through Christ, sees them for what they are. We may use our
minds as flashlights with which to discover things, but these flashlights derive all their
power of illumination from the sun.
As to common grace, does that bolster the traditional method of apologetic? Not in
the least. It restrains the destructive intellectual and spiritual tendency in the natural man
and releases in him the creative powers given him by his Creator, so that he may, but in
spite of his basic principle, contribute to the progress of human knowledge.
The point of contact for the gospel must not be sought (a) in the true interpretation of
any fact by the natural man, nor (b) in common grace which restrains but does not
eradicate the hostile attitude of the natural man to God.
Where then is the point of contact to be found? Where Paul says it is to be found,
namely, in the fact that all men are created in the image of God. Man may try as he will,
but he cannot eradicate this fact or his consciousness of it. His self-consciousness is a
creature-consciousness. The prodigal son may always and everywhere act as though he
had no father from whom his “substance” comes. Yet he knows he is a “liar” all the time.
So Paul says that, knowing God (gnontes ton theon), man wants to hold this knowledge
under.
Here, and here alone, is contact in the mind and heart of the natural man for the
gospel. The structure of reality as a whole is what Scripture says it is. Man is bound to
carry on his interpretation within this structure. The non-believer must be presented
positively with the claims of God in Christ for his conversion. This conversion must be a
conversion of the whole man. He must learn to see that the reason why any man can think
or do anything with respect to anything intelligently and with the proper Spiritual attitude
is because by Christ’s atoning death and the Holy Spirit’s regenerating power he sees and
does all things in a wholly different light, to the praise of his Creator-redeemer.
Then if the natural man continues to hold to his own position he is thereby shown that
he does so because of his existential antagonism to the truth. He is adding sin upon sin in
refusing to submit his thought captive to the obedience of Christ. If he continues in his
false view of himself and his world this is, in the last analysis, because God has left him
in his sin.
Thus Buswell is quite right when he says that a destructive argument requires a
constructive argument. The Reformed method of argument is first constructive. It
presents the biblical view positively by showing that all factual and logical discussions by
men take place by virtue of the world’s being what God in Christ says it is. It then
proceeds negatively to show that unless all facts and all logical relations be seen in the
light of the Christian framework, all human interpretation fails instantly. It fails instantly
in principle. God does continue to uphold all men by his providence and give them good
gifts calculated to lead them to repentance, but this does not, as such, change their hearts.
A few separate remarks may be made in reply to some of Buswell’s particular
objections.
(1) Buswell says: “Logically and metaphysically of course there is a direct path of
inference from any fact in the universe to God and to the correct view of that fact as a
created fact, but historically no one has ever followed that path, independent of
revelation.”
My reply is that no sinner has ever reasoned historically from any created fact to the
Creator of that fact because he has, in advance of his reasoning about these facts, already
placed them in a frame of reference that is exclusive of God. He makes himself, to begin
with, the final reference point in all that he says. The more consistent his logical
reasoning is, the more certainly will he end up with a finite God which is no God.
Buswell’s method of apologetics agrees with the natural man on the question of starting
point, which assumes that man is not the creature of God. Buswell therefore expects the
man to make a leap toward the Creator-god whom he has spurned in his starting point and
method.
(2) Buswell says: “Of course I agree that there is no ‘succession of moments’ in
God’s essential being, but sometimes you seem to imply that there is no succession of
moments in God’s consciousness. This must mean one of three things: (1) That God is
not conscious of the circumstances in which he has placed us and hence all that the Bible
says of the love and care of God is untrue. (2) That the sequence of events in this world is
only an illusion. (3) That there is a hopeless actual contradiction in the situation. The
word actual is necessary here, I think, for if you categorically state that there is no
succession of moments in the consciousness of God and yet that the Bible is true, the
contradiction is far more than merely apparent.”
In this statement Buswell makes an absolute contrast between the “essential being”
and the “consciousness” of God. However, the Reformed Confessions, on the basis of
Scripture, speak of God as omniscient, all wise, etc. Is there then some “essential being”
back of this God of which the Confessions speak? Of such an “essential being” we can
know nothing because only God can tell us what he is.
Buswell wants a “succession of moments” in God’s consciousness so that history may
have meaning. I hold that in such a case God would be immersed with man his creature in
the conditions to which he has made his creature subject and then history would have no
meaning.
Taking the position he does on this point will certainly get Buswell onto common
ground with the unbeliever, but it will also leave him there.
(3) Buswell says: “Your argument seems to be that since God completely knows
himself, therefore he contains within himself no possibilities or potentialities which are
not realities and actualities. In our conversation ... I said erroneously that you taught that
knowledge is reality. I had this paragraph in mind. I should have said that this paragraph
has meaning for me only on the assumption that God’s knowledge is equal to or the same
thing as reality or actuality. Otherwise there could be no such conclusion from the fact
that he fully knows himself. This paragraph seems also to imply that the potential is the
unknown. Now if I understand your philosophy correctly, you would escape from
Spinoza at this point only by what you call a seeming contradiction, but what to me
amounts to an actual contradiction. Your logic in this paragraph would drive you straight
into a timeless universe, only that you hold that time is actual for the creature but is not
actual in the experience of the Creator.”
“It seems to me quite contrary to established usage of words to say that there is no
potentiality or possibility in God which is not actual or real. This in common language
would mean that God has nothing more to do in time. This conclusion of course would
deny the doctrine of providence.”
Buswell wants a god with possibilities and potentialities within himself. Such a view
is indistinguishable from the “given element” that Edgar Brightman finds in god. But
Brightman is consistent in that he speaks of his god as finite. Buswell continues to think
that a god who must still realize himself in part is the God of the Bible.
Buswell cannot distinguish between Reformed theology and the pantheism of
Spinoza. The only alternative that he sees to abstract Spinozistic monism is absolute
pluralism or temporalism.
His theology on the two points just now discussed fits in with the Butler type of
apologetics Buswell defends. Here is where the consistency appears to come in.
(4) Buswell says: “You do not hold, do you, that there is anything in God contrary to
our understanding?” The answer is no because at the bottom of everything I discuss in the
syllabus is Paul’s teaching that man unavoidably knows God because he is made in the
image of God. When I say that God is incomprehensible I mean that God cannot be
exhaustively known by his creature. But I also believe that a “finite god” such as
Buswell’s various objections seem to presuppose, is incomprehensible to man in the
sense of unknowable.
(5) Buswell says: “I cannot find anything in the Bible to deny that complete
comprehension is an ideal which God sets before us.”
I am not surprised at this, since on your case, Dr. Buswell, God and man are subject
to the same temporal limitations. Both must realize potentialities within themselves. Both
must strive in unison for ultimate comprehension of all reality. That is their common
ideal. And an ideal it must ever remain for both. Or rather, neither can ever see the ideal.
(6) Buswell says: “Are you not historically incorrect in saying that the church has
emphasized that Christ was not a human person? In the following paragraph I agree of
course that Christ did not lay aside his divine nature, but I cannot read my theology in
any such way as to warrant your saying that this requires us to deny that he became a
human person and was a divine-human person. He ‘was and continueth to be God and
man in two distinct natures and one person forever.’ He was one person and that one
person since the incarnation continues to be a divine person but is also ‘man.’ I agree of
course that the divine and human natures were not intermingled, but I fear that a student
would not really see that you emphasize the humanity of Christ’s person as clearly as the
deity of his person.”
Buswell here answers himself by quoting the Confession as saying that Christ, when
he became man, continued to be God and man “in two distinct natures and one person
forever.” Is this “one person” then not divine?
(7) Buswell says: “If there is no potentiality in God, then either (a) he has done
everything he ever intends to do, or (b) our experience of sequence in time and space is
an illusion, or (c) there is a hopeless contradiction in reality.”
Here again Buswell knows no more basic dichotomy than that of abstract logic like
that of Spinoza or abstract temporalism like that of the Pragmatist. The Bible has a
dichotomy that underlies and relativizes this sort of dichotomy. The Bible makes the
eternal, self-existent God the Creator of man as temporally conditioned. It is to be
expected that man as temporally conditioned makes such false dichotomies as Buswell
makes if he is, to begin with, unwilling to make the Creator-creature distinction basic to
all his thought.
At this point again it is his anti-biblical apologetic method that accounts for Buswell’s
non-biblical view of God. Meaning to oppose rationalism and a priorism of every sort in
the interest of the reality and significance of history, Buswell draws God down into
history and thus loses all.
There are many more points in Buswell’s letter, but the principle ones have been
taken up. All his objections spring from a semi-Arminian view of man. For him simple
historic Calvinism is virtually identical with pantheism. This has been the stock in trade
position of Romanists and Arminians. Their position is unbiblical and for that reason is
unable to challenge the unbelief of our age. The burden of proof is upon Buswell to show
that his position both in apologetics and in theology does not suffer from the defects of
theirs.
