The Protestant Doctrine Of
Scripture

General Introduction
The studies presented in this series are written with a view to the defense of the
doctrine of the free grace of God through Christ as he testifies of himself in the Scriptures
of the Old and New Testaments. They are written from the point of view of one who
believes the Reformed Faith to be the most truly biblical expression of the Christian
Faith. They are written from the point of view of one who believes that a world that lies
in darkness needs, therefore, to hear about the Reformed Faith.
Moreover, if the world needs to hear the Reformed Faith, the statement of this Faith
must be true to the historic Reformed creeds. The Reformed Faith, to be heard, must,
therefore, be set over against neo-orthodoxy.
These studies are merely student syllabi; they are not to be regarded as published
books.
These studies are produced under the auspices of the den Dulk Christian Foundation
of Ripon, California.
Preface
Some Protestant observers at Vatican 2 have expressed their joy with the changes that
seem to be taking place in Roman Catholic theology, especially with respect to its
teaching on revelation and Scripture. Is there any basis in The Documents Of Vatican 2
for such joy? We believe not.
To be sure the Dogmatic Constitution On Divine Revelation (Dei Verbum) no longer
speaks of the Bible and Tradition as two sources of revelation. “Sacred tradition and
sacred Scripture form one sacred deposit of the word of God, which is committed to the
Church.” 1 The church “has always regarded the Scriptures together with sacred tradition
as the supreme rule of faith, and will ever do so.” 2 Sacred theology, therefore, “rests on
the written Word of God, together with sacred tradition, as its primary and perpetual
foundation.” 3 Moreover the interpretation of the Bible by the Sons of the Church “is
subject finally to the judgment of the Church, which carries out the divine commission
and ministry of guarding and interpreting the Word of God.” 4
Drawing Scripture, tradition and the teaching office of the church together, the
council says: “It is clear, therefore, that sacred tradition, sacred Scripture, and the
teaching authority of the Church, in accord with God’s most wise design, are so linked
and joined together that one cannot stand without the others, and that all together and
each in its own way under the action of the one Holy Spirit contribute effectively to the
salvation of souls.” 5
1
 The Documents of Vatican 2, Walter M. Abbot, S. J., General Editor; tr. Very Rev.
Msgr. Joseph Gallacher, Translation Editor, Dogmatic Constitution on Divine Revelation,
Ch. 11, Sect. 10.
2
 Ch. 6. 21.
3
 Sect. 241.
4
 Sect. 12.
5
 Sect. 10.
There would seem to be no evidence in this that there has been anything like an
approach to the historic Protestant view of Scripture. The point cannot and need not here
be argued. The reason for speaking of it here is to indicate the fact that Protestants today
need to look afresh into their own teaching with respect to Revelation in Scripture. The
present paper deals with only one phase of this doctrine, namely, that the Protestant
doctrine of Scripture is involved in the Protestant view of the content of Scripture. More
particularly, the present paper takes notice of the unbiblical character of the views of such
Protestants as fail to see this basic point. There can be no proper statement or defense of
the Protestant view of Scripture unless it be made in terms of a proper statement and
defense of Protestantism as a whole. The Protestant view of Scripture is what it is
because Protestantism is what it is as the Roman Catholic view of Scripture is what it is
because Roman Catholicism is what it is. And finally there can be no proper statement
and defense of Christianity unless it be done in terms of a biblical Protestantism.
Protestant Christians must show that human predication at any point is unintelligible
unless it be in terms of the self-identifying Christ of Scripture.
What needs to be done today is to show that neither Roman Catholicism nor neo-
orthodox Protestantism offer any solid foundation for human interpretation in any field.
Roman Catholicism and neo-orthodoxy are drawing together in a common opposition to
historic, biblical Protestantism. Following the example of the Pharisees in their
opposition to the self-identifying Christ, Roman Catholicism and neo-orthodox
Protestantism seek to make the supposedly growing ethical consciousness of man the
ultimate standard of truth and error, of right and wrong. Herewith the gospel of man is
substituted for the gospel of Christ.
We must, therefore, look anew into the works of such men as Herman Bavinck and
Benjamin Breckinridge Warfield, to discover what the historic Protestant view of
Scripture is and how we may, by holding to it, be of service to the Church in our day.
Chapter 1:
The Reformed Doctrine Of Scripture
Recently, a large number of “statements” and discussions on the doctrine of Scripture
written both from the “conservative” and from the “liberal” view have appeared. It is not
the purpose of this pamphlet to deal with these. Its purpose is rather to deal with some
quite striking differences between representative “evangelical” and Reformed Christians
on their view of the necessity, the authority, the clarity, and the sufficiency of God’s
revelation in Scripture as they, from the Scriptures, seek to present the message of saving
grace to men.
It is the Christ who speaks to us in Scripture. In it he tells us who he is and what we
are. He tells us that he has come to save us from our sins. For that purpose the Father sent
him into the world. In order to bring that work to completion in individual men the Holy
Spirit takes the things of Christ and gives them unto us (Cf. Jn 16:14–15).
In saving us from sin, Christ saves us unto his service. Through the salvation that is
ours in Christ by the Spirit, we take up anew the cultural mandate that was given man at
the outset of history. Whether we eat or drink or whatever we do, we want now to do all
to the glory of God. Moreover, we want our fellow men with us to do all things to the
glory of God. We are bound, as we are eager, to inform them of that which we have been
told, namely, that we shall continue to abide under the wrath of God and eventually be
cast out into utter darkness unless, by God’s grace, we seek to do all things to the glory of
God. Calling upon all men everywhere to join with us in fulfilling the original cultural
mandate given to mankind—which we may now undertake because of the redeeming
work of Christ—is our joy each day.
The cultural mandate is to be fulfilled in our handling of the facts or events of our
environment. Men must subdue, to the service of Christ, the earth and all that is therein.
As the Christian constantly does so, he is constantly conscious of the fact that he is
working on God’s estate. He is not himself the owner of anything, least of all of himself.
He is the bondservant of God through Christ. Therein lies his freedom. Those who still
think of themselves as owners of themselves and think of the world as a grab-bag cannot
properly evaluate the situation as it really is. Unbeknown to them, they too are working
on God’s estate. As they construct their temples to themselves God looks down from
heaven and watches them; he yet cares for them. He has infinite patience with them. Will
they not finally understand that neither they nor the world belongs to them? Will they not
repent? Can they not observe the fact that the wisdom of this world is but foolishness in
the sight of God? Has not the whole of the history of human philosophy shown that if the
“facts” of the world were not created and controlled by the redemptive providence of
God, they would be utterly discrete and therefore undiscoverable? Has not the whole
history of philosophy also shown that when man regards his logical powers as positively
legislative for Reality, he winds himself into a knot of contradiction? Has not the history
of thought displayed the fact that if man takes the laws of logic as negatively legislative
with respect to the facts with which they deal, then his logic and his reality stand over
against one another in an absolute contrast, or else, when they do come into contact, they
immediately destroy one another?
In other words, it is the Christian’s task to point out to the scientist that science needs
to stand on Christ and his redeeming work if it is not to fall to pieces. Without Christ he
has no foundation on which to stand while he makes his contradictions. A scientific
method not based on the presupposition of the truth of the Christian story is like an effort
to string an infinite number of beads, no two of which have holes in them, by means of a
string of infinite length, neither end of which can be found.
How awesome then the responsibility of the Christian. He must proclaim the Christ as
the only name given under heaven by which man, the whole man, by which mankind,
with its cultural task, must be saved from sin unto God. What a joy to tell the scientist
and the philosopher that they may labor for eternity if only they will labor for the Christ.
But when the Christian does thus witness to the promise of great joy that is in the Christ
who saves the whole man with the whole of his culture, then inevitably what is a
“promise” to some becomes a “curse” to others. Paul says:
“Now thanks be unto God, which always causeth us to triumph in Christ, and maketh
manifest the savour of his knowledge by us in every place. For we are unto God a sweet
savour of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish: to the one we are the
savour of death unto death; and to the other the savour of life unto life” (2 Cor 2:14–16).
Even as some accept, so also others reject the word of God’s grace. To them the
Word becomes a savour of death. Then they, with their culture, are lost. The work of their
hands, their science, their art, their philosophy, their theology, in short their culture, will
ultimately profit, not themselves, but those who have obeyed the word of grace in Christ.
To be sure none of the cultural efforts of any man will be lost, for all things are Christ’s
and Christ is God’s. But there are men who will lose their cultural efforts. They will lose
the fruit of their labors because they have refused to labor unto Christ. They will reap the
reward of Baal who sought to curse Israel and, most of all, Israel’s God. They will seek in
vain, to die the death of the righteous.
It is therefore the same God who reveals himself both in nature and in Scripture. It is
this God and only he who is “infinite in being, glory, blessedness, and perfection, all-
sufficient, eternal, unchangeable, incomprehensible, every where present, almighty,
knowing all things, most wise, most holy, most just, most merciful and gracious,
longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth.” It is, to be sure, from Scripture rather
than from nature that this description of God is drawn. Yet it is this same God, to the
extent that he is revealed at all, that is revealed in nature.
Contemplation of this fact seems at once to plunge us into great difficulty. Are we not
told that nature reveals nothing of the grace of God? Does not the Westminster
Confession insist that men cannot be saved except through the knowledge of God, “be
they ever so diligent to frame their lives according to the light of nature; and the law of
that religion they do profess”? Saving grace is not manifest in nature; yet it is the God of
saving grace who manifests himself by means of nature. How can these two be
harmonized?
The answer to this problem must be found in the fact that God is “eternal,
incomprehensible, most free, most absolute.” Any revelation that God gives of himself is
therefore absolutely voluntary. Precisely here lies the union of the various forms of God’s
revelation with one another. God’s revelation in nature, together with God’s revelation in
Scripture, form God’s one grand scheme of covenant-revelation of himself to man. 1
1. The Necessity Of Natural Revelation
To bring out the interrelatedness of God’s revelation in Scripture with his revelation
in nature, we speak first of the necessity of natural revelation. It is customary to speak of
the necessity of supernatural revelation because of the fact that there is no revelation of
grace in nature. However, it is equally true that the revelation of grace would operate in a
vacuum if it did not operate in nature as revealing God. The supernatural can never be
recognized for what it is unless the natural is recognized for what it is: both must be
recognized in the light of God’s supernatural revelation. Everything that man does with
respect to nature, he does either as keeping or as breaking the covenant of grace that God
has made with man. Thus the scientist in the laboratory and the philosopher in his study
are both dealing with their materials either as a covenant-keeper or as a covenant-breaker.
All of man’s acts, all of man’s questionings, all of man’s affirmations, indeed all of his
denials in any dimension of his interests, are covenantally conditioned.
2. The Authority Of Natural Revelation
Naturally, if all of man’s acts with respect to nature, as well as with respect to
Scripture, are covenantally conditioned, this is because everywhere Christ speaks to him,
and speaks always with absolute authority. The scientist, may or may not recognize this
fact. If he is not a Christian, he will argue that any such thing as Christ having authority
an absolute authority—with respect to his scientific procedure, is utterly destructive of
the very idea of science. The idea of science, he will argue, presupposes freedom on the
part of the scientist to make any hypothesis that he thinks may fit the facts. Any such
absolute authority also excludes, he will continue, the idea that the words of Christ may
and must be tested by facts and the order of facts, i.e., by natural laws already known to
man from his earlier experience and experimentation. Suppose, he may say, that I had to
work under the absolute restriction of the idea of an all-controlling redemptive
providence of God such as the Bible teaches. That would be against the idea of an
absolutely open universe. My hypothesis would then have to be of such a nature as to be
in accordance with, and even subordinate to, the idea of this all-controlling Providence.
This would exclude all newness in science. All would be already fixed. On the other
hand, the idea of an all over-arching and redemptive providence would require me to
allow that God could arbitrarily come into the “unity” of nature which science has
discovered through many toiling efforts, and destroy this “unity” with miraculous
insertions. We would then have to allow for the arbitrary createdness of every fact with
which we deal. We would have to interpret the idea of scientific “law” as being
subservient to that of the biblical account of sin and of redemption controlled by the fiat
of the sovereign God. This cannot be, and we will not have it!
Put in other words, the methodology of science which is not definitely based upon the
redemptive story of the Bible is based upon the assumption that on the one hand the
1
 Cf. my article “Nature and Scripture” in The Infallible Word.
universe must be wholly open and on the other hand that it must be wholly closed. In
expressing this idea, Morris Cohen says that science needs both the idea of the open and
the idea of the closed universe, but it needs these not as constitutive but as limiting
concepts of one another 2
If man does not own the authority of Christ in the field of science, he assumes his
own ultimate authority as back of his effort. The argument between the covenant-keeper
and the covenant-breaker is never exclusively about any particular fact or about any
number of facts. It is always, at the same time, about the nature of facts. And back of the
argument about the nature of facts, there is the argument about the nature of man.
However restricted the debate between the believer and the non-believer may be at any
one time, there are always two world views ultimately at odds with one another. On the
one side is a man who regards himself as being unable to find an intelligible
interpretation of experience without reference to God as his Creator and to Christ as his
Redeemer. On the other side is the man who is certain that he cannot find any such an
interpretation. He assumes that there resides with him the power to make a universal
negative statement about the nature of all reality.
The scientist who is a Christian therefore has the task of pointing out to his friend and
colleague, who is not a Christian, that unless he is willing to stand upon the Christian
story with respect to the world which has been redeemed through Christ, there is nothing
but failure for him. Scientific effort is utterly unintelligible unless it is frankly based upon
the order placed in the universe of created facts by Christ the Redeemer.
3. The Sufficiency Of Natural Revelation
Christ tells us in his word that nature was never meant to function by itself apart from
the direct word-revelation of God. From the beginning, it was insufficient without its
supernatural concomitant. It was inherently a limiting notion. It was but the
presupposition of historical action on the part of man as covenant personality with respect
to supernaturally conveyed communication. But for that specific purpose it was wholly
sufficient. It was historically sufficient.
After the fall of man natural revelation is still historically sufficient. It is sufficient for
such as have in Adam brought the curse of God upon nature. It is sufficient to render
them without excuse. Those who are in prison and cannot clearly see the light of the sun
receive their due inasmuch as they have first abused that light. If nature groans in pain
and travail because of man’s abuse of it, this very fact—that is, the very curse of God on
nature—should be instrumental anew in making men accuse or excuse themselves.
Nature as it were yearns to be released from her imprisonment in order once more to be
united to her Lord in fruitful union. When nature is abused by man she cries out to her
creator for vengeance and through it for redemption.
It was in the mother promise that God gave the answer to nature’s cry (Gn 3:15). In
this promise there was a twofold aspect. There was first the aspect of vengeance. He that
should come was to bruise the head of the serpent, the one that led man in setting up
nature as independent of the supernatural revelation of God. Thus nature was once more
to be given the opportunity of serving as the proper field of exercise for the direct
2
 Cf. my syllabus Christian Evidences.
supernatural communication of God to man. But this time this service came at a more
advanced point in history. Nature was now the bearer of God’s curse as well as of his
general mercy. The “good,” that is, the believers, are, generally, hedged about by God.
Yet they must not expect that always and in every respect this will be the case. They must
learn to say with Job, be it after much trial, “Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him”
(Jb 13:15). The “evil,” that is, the unbelievers, will generally be rewarded with the natural
consequences of their deeds. But this too is not always and without qualification the case.
The wicked sometimes prosper. Nature only shows tendencies. And tendencies point
forward to the time when tendencies shall have become the rules without exception. The
tendency itself is meaningless without the certainty of the climax. The present regularity
of nature is therefore once again to be looked upon as a limiting notion. At every stage in
history God’s revelation in nature is sufficient for the purpose it was meant to serve, that
of being the playground for the process of differentiation between those who would and
those who would not serve God. 3
4. The Perspicuity Of Natural Revelation
Finally we turn to the perspicuity of nature which corresponds to the perspicuity of
Scripture. We have stressed the fact that God’s revelation in nature was from the outset of
history meant to be taken conjointly with God’s supernatural communication. This might
seem to indicate that natural revelation is not inherently perspicuous. Then too it has been
pointed out that back of both kinds of revelation is the incomprehensible God. And this
fact again might, on first glance, seem to militate strongly against the claim that nature
clearly reveals God. Yet these very facts themselves are the best guarantee of the genuine
perspicuity of natural revelation. The perspicuity of God’s revelation in nature depends
for its very meaning upon the fact that it is an aspect of the total and totally voluntary
revelation of a God who is self-contained. God’s incomprehensibility to man is due to the
fact that he is exhaustively comprehensible to himself. God is light and in him is no
darkness at all. As such; he cannot deny himself. This God naturally has an all-
comprehensive plan for the created universe. He has planned all the relationships
between all the aspects of created being. He has planned the end from the beginning. All
created reality therefore actually displays this plan. It is, in consequence, inherently
rational.
It is quite true, of course, that created man is unable to penetrate to the very bottom of
this inherently clear revelation. But this does not mean that on this account the revelation
of God is not clear, even for him. Created man may see clearly what is revealed clearly
even if he cannot see exhaustively. Man does not need to know exhaustively in order to
know truly and certainly. When on the created level of existence man thinks God’s
thoughts after him, that is, when man thinks in self-conscious submission to the voluntary
revelation of the self-sufficient God, he has therewith the only possible ground of
certainty for his knowledge. When man thinks thus he thinks as a covenant creature
should wish to think. That is to say, man normally thinks in analogical fashion. He
realizes that God’s thoughts are self-contained. He knows that his own interpretation of
nature must therefore be a re-interpretation of what is already fully interpreted by God.
3
 The Infallible Word, pp. 267, 268.
The concept of analogical thinking is of especial significance here. Soon we shall
meet with a notion of analogy that is based upon the very denial of the concept of the
incomprehensible God. It is therefore of the utmost import that the Confession’s concept
of analogical thinking be seen to be the direct implication of its doctrine of God.
One further point must here be noted. We have seen that since the fall of man God’s
curse rests upon nature. This has brought great complexity into the picture. All this,
however, in no wise detracts from the historical and objective perspicuity of nature.
Nature can and does reveal nothing but the one comprehensive plan of God. The psalmist
does not say that the heavens possibly or probably declare the glory of God. Nor does the
apostle assert that the wrath of God is probably revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. Scripture takes the clarity of God’s revelation
for granted at every stage of human history. Even when man, as it were, takes out his own
eyes, this act itself turns revelational in his wicked hands, testifying to him that his sin is
a sin against the light that lighteth every man coming into the world. Even to the very
bottom of the most complex historical situations, involving sin and all its consequences,
God’s revelation shines with unmistakable clarity. “If I make my bed in hell, behold thou
art there” (Ps 139:8). Creatures have no private chambers.
Both the perspicuity of Scripture and the perspicuity of natural revelation, then, may
be said to have their foundation in the doctrine of the God who “hideth himself,” whose
thoughts are higher than man’s thoughts and whose ways are higher than man’s ways.
There is no discrepancy between the idea of mystery and that of perspicuity with respect
either to revelation in Scripture or to revelation in nature. On the contrary the two ideas
are involved in one another. The central unifying concept of the entire Confession is the
doctrine of God and his one unified comprehensive plan for the world. The contention
consequently is that at no point is there any excuse for man’s not seeing all things as
happening according to this plan.
In considering man’s acceptance of natural revelation, we again take our clue from
the Confession and what it says about the acceptance of Scripture. Its teaching on man’s
acceptance of Scriptural revelation is in accord with its teachings on the necessity,
authority, sufficiency and perspicuity of Scripture. The Scriptures as the finished product
of God’s supernatural and saving revelation to man have their own evidence in
themselves. The God who speaks in Scripture cannot refer to anything that is not already
authoritatively revelational of himself for the evidence of his own existence. There is no
thing that does not exist by his creation. All things take their meaning from him. Every
witness to him is a “prejudiced” witness. For any fact to be a fact at all, it must be a
revelational fact.
It is accordingly no easier for sinners to accept God’s Revelation in Scripture. They
are no more ready of themselves to do the one than to do the other. From the point of
view of the sinner, theism is as objectionable as is Christianity. Theism that is worthy of
the name is Christian theism. Christ said that no man can come to the Father but by him.
No one can become a theist unless he becomes a Christian. Any God that is not the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ is not God but an idol.
It is therefore the Holy Spirit bearing witness by and with the Word in our hearts that
alone effects the required Copernican revolution and makes us at the same time both
Christians and theists. Before the fall, man also needed the witness of the Holy Spirit.
Even then the third person of the Holy Trinity was operative in and through the naturally
revelational consciousness of man so that it might react fittingly and properly to the
works of God’s creation. But then that operation was so natural that man himself needed
not at all or scarcely to be aware of its existence. When man fell, he denied the naturally
revelatory character of every fact including that of his own consciousness. He assumed
that he was autonomous; he assumed that his consciousness was not revelational of God
but only of himself. He assumed himself to be non-created. He assumed that the work of
interpretation, as by the force of his natural powers he was engaged in it, was an original
instead of a derivative procedure. He would not think God’s thoughts after him; he would
instead think only his own original thoughts.
Now if anything is obvious from Scripture it is that man is not regarded as a proper
judge of God’s revelation to him. Man is said or assumed from the first page to the last to
be a creature of God. God’s consciousness is therefore taken to be naturally original as
man’s is naturally derivative. Man’s natural attitude in all self-conscious activities was
therefore meant to be that of obedience. It is to this deeper depth, deeper than the sinner’s
consciousness can ever reach by itself, that Scripture appeals when it says, “Come let us
reason together.” It appeals to covenant-breakers and argues with them about the
unreasonableness of covenant-breaking. And it is only when the Holy Spirit gives man a
new heart that he will accept the evidence of Scripture about itself and about nature for
what it really is. The Holy Spirit’s regenerating power enables man to place all things in
true perspective.
Man the sinner, as Calvin puts it, through the testimony of the Spirit receives a new
power of sight by which he can appreciate the new light that has been given in Scripture.
The new light and the new power of sight imply one another. The one is fruitless for
salvation without the other. It is by grace, then, by the gift of the Holy Spirit alone, that
sinners are able to observe the fact that all nature, including even their own negative
attitude toward God, is revelational of God, the God of Scripture. The wrath of God is
revealed, Paul says, on all those who keep down the truth. Man’s sinful nature has
become his second nature. This sinful nature of man must now be included in nature as a
whole. And through it God is revealed. He is revealed as the just one, as the one who
hates iniquity and punishes it. Yet he must also be seen as the one who does not yet
punish to the full degree of their ill dessert the wicked deeds of sinful men.
All this is simply to say that one must be a believing Christian to study nature in the
proper frame of mind and with proper procedure. It is only the Christian consciousness
that is ready and willing to regard all nature, including man’s own interpretative
reactions, as revelational of God. But this very fact requires that the Christian
consciousness make a sharp distinction between what is revelational in this broad and
basic sense and what is revelational in the restricted sense. When man had not sinned, he
was naturally anxious constantly to seek contact with the supernatural positive revelation
of God. But it is a quite different matter when we think of the redeemed sinner. He is
restored to the right relationship. But he is restored in principle only. There is a drag upon
him. His “old man” wants him to interpret nature apart from the supernatural revelation
in which he operates. The only safeguard he has against this historical drag is to test his
interpretations constantly by the principles of the written Word. And if theology succeeds
in bringing forth ever more clearly the depth of the riches of the biblical revelation of
God in Scripture, the Christian philosopher or scientist will be glad to make use of this
clearer and fuller interpretation in order that his own interpretation of nature may be all
the fuller and clearer too, and thus more truly revelational of God. No subordination of
philosophy or science to theology is intended here. The theologian is simply a specialist
in the field of biblical interpretation taken in the more restricted sense. The philosopher is
directly subject to the Bible and must in the last analysis rest upon his own interpretation
of the Word. But he may accept the help of those who are more constantly and sore
exclusively engaged in biblical study than he himself an be. 4
It is this stress—that from the beginning, revelation both in the facts of the created
universe and by means of direct thought communication to man from God with respect to
those very facts and man’s task with respect to those acts—that marks the particularity of
the Reformed outlook on Christianity. It is the idea of the interrelatedness of every aspect
of the revelation of God to man that is all important. It is only when this interrelatedness
is stressed that, as Christians, we can effectively challenge the wisdom of the world and
show that it has been made foolish by God. Only thus can the total interpretation of life
and the world, as given by Christ in Scripture, be that on which alone every aspect of
human experience must be based in order to have significance.
5. Analogical Thinking As Scripture Teaches It
According to Christ speaking in the Scripture, man has sinned against him by
declaring his independence. When man listened to the temptation of Satan it was, in
effect, to deny his own creaturehood. Adam was no longer willing to love his Creator and
to show this love by obedience to his voice. He wanted to make himself the center of his
own interpretative effort.
Involved in this was the idea that man rejected God’s prediction with respect to what
we now, after Kant, call the phenomenal realm. He said in his heart that God did not
know that death would be the consequence of eating the forbidden fruit. Why did Adam
think that God did not know? There were no records of what had happened to people who
had eaten this fruit in the past. Could not Satan’s hypothesis be as good as God’s? Does
not the scientific method require that, at the outset of any investigation of the facts of the
physical universe, any hypothesis be placed on a par with any other hypothesis? Surely
any hypothesis that anyone makes with respect to the future configuration of facts must
be tested by those future facts themselves. And these future facts must not be interpreted
in advance.
Here then, are the marks of the natural man in his attitude toward the interpretation of
the facts (events) of the world:
(1) He thinks of himself as the ultimate judge of what can or cannot be. He will not
allow any authority to stand above him revealing to him what may or may not have
happened in the past or what may or may not happen in the future.
(2) This assertion or assumption of autonomy on the part of man makes a covert, if
not an overt assertion about the nature of God. God (it is assumed if not asserted) cannot
be of such a nature as to control any and all phenomena.
(3) These two assertions or assumptions imply a third: that man’s thought is, in the
final analysis, absolutely original. Whatever his ultimate environment may be, the area of
4
 Cf. The Infallible Word, pp. 269–275.
interpretation that man makes for himself will be true for him because his thought is in
effect legislative with respect to that environment.
(4) The facts of man’s environment are not created or controlled by the providence of
God. They are brute facts, uninterpreted and ultimately irrational. The universe is a
Chance controlled universe. It is a wholly open universe. Yet, at the same time, it is a
closed universe. It is so in this sense: it cannot be what. Christ says it is, namely, created,
governed, and redeemed by him. In this one respect the cosmos is closed—there can be
no such God as the Bible reveals. This is the universal negative of the openminded men
of philosophy and science.
Herbert Feigl seems to see this great gulf fixed between the men of science and
philosophy and the people of God when he says: If by religion one refers to an explanation of
the universe and a derivation of moral norms from theological premises, then indeed there is
logical incompatibility with the results, methods, and general outlook of science. 5
The basically important point about all this is that the scientist as well as the
philosopher and the theologian, unless he be converted to Christ by his Spirit, follows the
method that was introduced into the world by Adam when he listened to Satan. The
essence of this method is that man starts and finishes his interpretation about any and
every aspect of life with the assumption of his own autonomy, with the assumption of the
brute factuality of the material with which he deals; and with the assumption of abstract
formality of the logic which he uses to relate the brute facts to one another.
The Christian, on the other hand, has been saved by the blood and tears of Christ from
this God-insulting and self-destroying methodology.
The two positions can be well illustrated by Descartes on the one hand and by Calvin
on the other. Descartes starts with man as though he were sufficient unto himself and
could make himself the final reference point in his interpretation of himself and the
world. Descartes thought he had a clear and distinct idea of himself apart from his
relation to God. It was after he had determined who he himself was that he sought to
place himself in relation to the world and to God. These relations were therefore
secondary relations.
In complete contrast with this approach is that of Calvin who also started with man—
and who can help but do so?—but who started with man as set, from the beginning, in
relation to his Creator and his Redeemer. After this establishment of a primary and
immediate relation, Calvin proceeds to interpret himself and his world in detail. Seeing
himself as redeemed by the blood of Christ, he knows that sin still remains within him.
He still tends to fall back into his naturally autonomous ways. Calvin keeps telling
himself and us, that all things (of nature as well as grace) must, from the outset, be seen
in their relation to the story of God’s creation and redemption of the world. Since the
Redeemer speaks to him, not through individual mystical insight but by the word that his
Savior has given to his church in the form of Scripture, the believer will go to the record
of that redemptive work which Christ has accomplished for the world. That record will
shed light on every fact in every relation in the world. The record of the redemptive work
of Christ is the record given by the Holy Spirit through the ministry of the prophets and
apostles. God has not left man alone with the event of redemption, leaving it to man’s
own sinful heart to interpret it. On the contrary, God has with the facts given the
5
 H. Feigl, “The Scientific Outlook: Naturalism and Humanism,” Readings in Philosophy
of Science, ed. Brodbeck and Feigl. New York, 1953, p. 16.
interpretation of the facts. It is the triune God that is active in saving the world. The
Father sent his Son to secure objective redemption for it. Then the Father, with the Son,
sent the Spirit to inspire his servants to interpret the facts of redemption. The one without
the other is meaningless. It is the triune God who tells us what he has done for sinful
man’s redemption. The final aspect of this redemption is that, by the regenerating power
of the Spirit, sinful man learns to submit his own interpretation, once based on the idea of
human autonomy, to the interpretation which the God of grace has provided for him in
the Word through the inspiration of the Scripture. This is a truly biblical and therefore a
truly analogical methodology.
Chapter 2:
The Roman Catholic View Of Analogy
And The Doctrine Of Scripture
We have quoted Calvin to indicate that he thinks concretely about the relation of
God’s interpretation to man’s response Calvin makes the revelation of God in Christ
through Scripture his starting point with respect to every interpretation of any fact in the
universe. As he did so, he set his view squarely over against that of Roman Catholicism.
Roman Catholicism also speaks of the idea of analogy. In fact, this idea is central to
all its thinking. Its idea of analogy, however, starts with man as autonomous. Following
the Apostle Paul, Calvin makes the Creator-creature distinction basic to his thinking. Paul
teaches that every man is created in the image of God. Being thus created, in the image of
God, man cannot help but know God as his Creator. But having become a sinner, he does
not want to own God as his Creator. He therefore makes his interpretations of life in
terms of a principle of abstract rational continuity, i.e., of abstract logic, which is above
both God and man to “being in general.” Parmenides says that reality must be that which
rational thought, that is, divine-human thought, can, without contradiction, say that it
must be. Applying this principle to the facts of the world, he says that there can be no
reality to what appear to us as changing facts of experience. Yet on the basis of fallen
man, the idea of absolute change has as good a right to be thought of as ultimate as has
the idea of the changeless. Heraclitus had as good a right to say that all things change as
Parmenides had to say that nothing changes. When others at later times said that all
things are both wholly changeless and wholly changing, they had as much right to do so
as did either Parmenides or Heraclitus to say what they said. Those who hold that
everything changes can be refuted negatively up to a point by those who hold that
nothing changes. It is obvious that if everything changes, predication ceases. Again, those
who hold that nothing changes can be refuted negatively up to a point by those who say
that all things change. It is obvious that if nothing changes, predication again ceases.
Moreover, it is obvious that any modus vivendi between the two extreme views has as
much right as any other modus vivendi or as either the idea of pure staticism or the idea of
pure flux.
All non-Christian positions have equal rights with respect to one another just because
none of them have any right to their views. If any of them are going to say anything
definite about any fact in this world in relation to any other fact in this world, they must
flatly contradict themselves in every sentence which they utter. They must use a static
principle of continuity and a purely contingent principle of discontinuity in everything
that they say about anything. If they say anything about any fact in the space-time world,
they must say how the one fact differs from the other fact in terms of the space-time
relations that both occupy. But to say how one fact differs from another fact in terms of
the space-time continuum requires one to have some intelligible conception of this space-
time continuum as a whole. Immanuel Kant was quite right in demanding this. But Kant
himself was unable to say anything intelligible about the space-time continuum as a
whole. The reason for this inability lay in the fact that he sought to do so in terms of man
as the final reference point in predication. For all the advances that he may be said to
have made upon Descartes in certain respects, Kant’s view of man, as well as that of
Descartes,’ is that of autonomy. It is this idea of autonomy that brings internal discord
into the very nature of man. On the one hand he must, on this view, interpret himself in
terms of a system of changeless laws, and therefore must know himself exhaustively. On
the other hand he must regard himself as wholly free from the laws he has himself
imposed upon the field of knowledge, and therefore must be unable to know himself at
all. According to Kant, therefore, man must be at the same time both wholly known and
wholly unknown to himself.
If then, on Kant’s basis; science is to be saved from having to do with, on the one
hand, an infinite number of unrelated particulars—like beads that have no holes in them
and, on the other hand, having to do with pure abstract logic—like an infinitely long
string which has no ends and certainly no end that can be found by man—then science
must be saved by this very same man who does not understand himself and who never
will understand himself. If then, in desperation, a god is brought into the picture, it must
be said that science is saved by a god who is the construct of man and who has, therefore,
the same problem as man—of wholly knowing and wholly not knowing either himself or
the world that he has and has not created.
But, it may be said that the position of Kant and his followers is admittedly
subjective. The Roman Catholic apologist tells us to turn to Greek thought. We will find,
he maintains, a truly objective approach to this problem by adoption of the Aristotelian
methodology of interpretation.
Let us examine the truth of this claim. Is not Greek philosophy a philosophy of those
who, just as well as Kant, are descendants of Adam? Is not their covenant-breaking
attitude expressed in their various systems of natural theology? There is obviously no
room for the Creator-creature distinction in any of the Greek thinkers. They all assume
that “Being” and its “laws” are the same for God and for man; that “thought” and its
“laws” are the same for God and for man; that ethical problems are the same for God and
for man. On the Greek view, God is not man’s Creator. Man does not, need not and must
not live by the revelation of God. Man must not obey the voice of God his Creator.
This monistic assumption characterizes Aristotle as much as any of the other Greek
philosophers. When he speaks of “Being” as inherently analogical he merely means that
“Being” has in it an element that is wholly static and also an element that is wholly
contingent.
If this Greek view of reality, of knowledge, and of ethics were true, then the Christian
story could not be true. There is, on the basis of the Greek story, no room for creation and
no room for redemption. The Greek view covers all of reality. It covers God as well as
the world. It is impossible to add the Christian view to the Greek view. The Greek view
of the emanation of the world from God cannot intelligently be twisted to become
anything like the Christian view of the creation of the world by God. The Greek view of
evil cannot intelligently be twisted so as to become anything like the Christian view of
sin. The Greek view of redemption cannot in any intelligible way be twisted so as to
become anything like the Christian view of redemption. It is clear, then, that the Greek
view cannot be made the foundation of a house of which Christianity is to be the upper
floor.
Yet it is this very type of building, composed of a Greek foundation and a Christian
upper story which is the essence of Roman Catholicism.
Rome’s natural theology starts from the Greek notion that man can interpret the
natural realm in Terms of the wisdom that is in man without reference to God his Creator
and Redeemer. This interpretation of the natural realm carries with it a view of God. God
is one God, that is, God is one god so long as he, or it, is thought of as an abstract
principle of unity which stands correlatively over against an equally abstract world of
pure potentiality. The God of natural theology, therefore, is both unknown and
unknowable by man so long as he differs from man. Moreover this God is unknown and
unknowable to himself because he is no self.
This is the kind of god that comes out of Rome’s natural theology. No other kind of
God could. Natural theology starts from man and then seeks to find, and does find, a god
who is like man. That is to say, natural theology uses the idea of analogy but sets it on its
head. The Christian religion says that God is self-contained; that he can say “I” without
needing to relate himself to anything over against himself while doing so. The God of
Christianity makes man in God’s image; the god of Greek, as well as of all other apostate
thinking, has man make god in man’s image.
Thomas Aquinas, the great Roman Catholic theologian, thought he had succeeded in
making a proper synthesis between the natural theology of the Greeks and the mysteries
of the Christian faith. The mysteries of the Christian faith, he said, are not against but
above reason. Reason such as that of the Greeks is given its opportunity to go as far as it
can in interpreting reality and then, when it has reached its limit, Christian faith takes
over.
The result of this procedure has been a toning down of the mysteries of the faith to
the requirements of autonomous reason. Rome’s theology is permeated with the idea of
human autonomy simply because its philosophy is. There is this much consistency in the
Roman Catholic synthesis: that at every point man as autonomous has his say. This is true
as much with respect to the question of authority as with any other question. In the
Romanist synthesis, there cannot be a Christ who speaks with absolute authority in
Scripture. The final authority to which Romanism appeals is that of the church and, in
particular, that of the Pope speaking ex cathedra. The Pope is said to derive his authority
from the Holy Spirit and therefore from Christ, but the Christ to which appeal is made
has no final authority to give. If he had, then he could not make it known except through
sinful man who infallibly tells man what he must mean.
Bishop Butler’s approach to the question of interpretation is to all intents and
purposes the same as that of Aquinas. It was an evil hour when the Roman Catholic
notion of analogy was taken over into Protestant apologetics. This point has been
discussed at length by the present writer in his syllabus Christian Theistic Evidences, and
in his “Introduction” to B. B. Warfield’s book, The Inspiration and Authority of the Bible.
The main point of Butler’s approach, which is representative of the essentially Romanist
approach popular in Protestant circles, is that it is once more taken for granted that sinful
man can and does give an essentially true interpretation of the natural world; that all he
needs is some additional information about God.
Chapter 3:
The Reformed Doctrine Of Inspiration
From the general discussion given above with respect to the Protestant doctrine of
Scripture we turn now to the more particular problem of its inspiration. We do this with
the help of Reformed scholars who have dealt at length with the subject.
But has there been a common view of Inspiration among Protestants?
1. B. B. Warfield
On this question we first turn to B. B. Warfield. Certainly he, if any one, deserves a
hearing. A number of his writings on revelation and inspiration were collected by Dr.
Samuel G. Craig in a book entitled The Inspiration and Authority of the Bible
(Philadelphia, 1948).
Warfield wrote about the “church-doctrine” of inspiration. “Surely the seeker after the
truth in the matter of the inspiration of the Bible, says Warfield, may well take this
church-doctrine as his starting point.” 1
What then is this “church-doctrine” of inspiration? It is to the effect that the Bible is
an “oracular book.” It is “the Word of God in such a sense that whatever it says God
says.” 2 Children of Christian parents learn to look upon it this way. They have, and
properly have, an “attitude of entire trust in every word of the Scriptures.” 3 This has been
the attitude of Christendom throughout the centuries of the Christian era. “Christendom
has always reposed upon the belief that the utterances of this book are properly oracles of
God. The whole body of Christian literature bears witness to this fact. We may trace its
stream to its source, and everywhere it is vocal with a living faith in the divine
trustworthiness of the Scriptures of God in every one of their affirmations.” 4 “The
earliest writers know no other doctrine.” 5 Augustine “affirms that he defers to the
canonical Scriptures alone among books with such reverence and honor that he most
‘firmly believes that no one of their authors has erred in anything, in writing.’ ” 6 As for
the Reformers, they held the same view that Augustine did. “Luther adopts these words
of Augustine’s as his own, and declares that the whole of the Scriptures are to be ascribed
to the Holy Ghost, and therefore cannot err. Calvin demands that whatever is propounded
in Scripture, ‘without exception,’ shall be humbly received by us—that the Scriptures as
a whole shall be received by us with the same reverence which we give to God, ‘because
they have emanated from him alone, and are mixed with nothing human.’ ” 7
1
 Op. Cit., p. 106.
2
 Idem.
3
 Ibid., p. 107.
4
 Idem.
5
 Ibid., p. 108.
6
 Idem.
7
 Ibid., pp. 108, 109.
A. The Commentators
“Now look,” says Warfield, “at those who, coming after the Reformers, have
laboured to exegete the text of Scripture for the benefit of the people of God. Watch the
saintly Bengel at his work. Others, too, count no labor wasted in their efforts to distill
from the very words of Holy Writ the honey which the Spirit has hidden in them for the
comfort and the delight of the saints. Watch B. M. Westcott as through the ‘closest
attention to the subtleties and minute variations of words and order’ he seeks for the
meaning of the Spirit. Is not this, as Wistar Hodge says, ‘a high testimony to verbal
inspiration’ ”? 8
How will we account for the fact that such a high view of the Bible in general and of
inspiration in particular was held through the history of the church? “The account is
simple enough,” says Warfield, “and capable of inclusion in a single sentence; this is the
doctrine of inspiration which was held by the writers of the New Testament and by Jesus
as reported in the Gospels. It is this simple fact that has commended it to the church of all
ages as the true doctrine.” The church-doctrine was the “Bible doctrine before it was the
church-doctrine, and it is the church-doctrine only because it is the Bible doctrine.” 9
We are then to speak of the verbal inspiration of Scripture. We may also speak of
“plenary” inspiration. 10 In the Bible we have, says Warfield, “the very Word of God
itself, spoken by God himself through human lips and pens.” 11 To a “plenarily inspired
Bible, humbly trusted as such, we actually, and as a matter of fact, owe all that has
blessed our lives with hopes of immortality of bliss, and with the present fruition of the
love of God in Christ.” 12
B. The Biblical Idea Of Inspiration
In his article, “The Biblical Idea of Inspiration,” Warfield shows, with all possible
fullness, that plenary or verbal inspiration is actually taught in the Scripture.
Jesus himself taught this fact with respect to the Old Testament. When he reasoned
with the Pharisees, it was on the assumption that they, with him, stood on the Scripture as
the word of God. “Scripture was common ground with Jesus and His opponents.” 13
When the Pharisees did not own him as the Messiah, it was because they had not known
the Scriptures. 14 According to Jesus, Scripture cannot be broken. Its whole meaning is
centered on him.
The apostles appointed by Christ to be the teachers of the Church took the Scriptures
in precisely the same way that Christ took them. The Scriptures were to them the oracles
of God. Warfield exegetes such passages as 2 Timothy 3:16 and 2 Peter 1:20, 21 in great
detail, showing that such is the case.
8
 Ibid., p. 110.
9
 Ibid., p. 114.
10
 Ibid., p. 117.
11
 Ibid., p. 125.
12
 Ibid., p. 126.
13
 Ibid., p. 140.
14
 Ibid., p. 143.
C. The Instrumentality Of Men
Of course, the fact that the Bible is the Word of God does not mean that it has
dropped from heaven. It was given through the service of men. In the view of the writers
of the New Testament, the Scriptures are the Word of God. This is true “in all its parts
and in all its elements, down to the least minutiae, in form of expression as well as in
substance of teaching.” Yet “the whole of it has been given by God through the
instrumentality of men.” This does not mean that some portions of Scripture are human
and some are divine. It means rather that in all of the Scripture there is a human side as
well as a divine. 15 “The Biblical writers do not conceive of the Scriptures as a human
product breathed into by the Divine Spirit, and thus heightened in its qualities or
endowed with new qualities; but as a divine product produced through the instrumentality
of men.” 16 The Spirit carried along the spirits of men so that they spontaneously spoke
and wrote what they did.
It would, therefore, be a complete misunderstanding of the relation of the divine and
the human in Scripture if it were conceived of in a manner other than exhaustively
personal. To be sure, God through Christ revealed what had not entered into the hearts of
sinful man. There were heights to be scaled which were beyond the reach of human
imagination. Sinners will surely repress that which God, in his grace, would reveal to
them for their salvation. To reach sinners in spite of themselves Christ spoke to them by
speaking through them. Borne by the Spirit they spoke spontaneously. Prepared by his
providence, they had all the gifts that they needed to do this. Thus God’s general purpose
of saving the world, of saving the whole man with the whole of his culture, was being
accomplished by God through Christ as in turn Christ through his Spirit directed and
controlled his chosen instruments. The Word of life was given to the whole world.
Thus Scripture is not merely a record of revelation. It is itself revelational. “Scripture
is conceived, from the point of view of the writers of the New Testament, not merely as
the record of revelation, but as itself a part of the redemptive revelation of God; not
merely as the record of the redemptive acts by which God is saving the world, but as
itself one of these redemptive acts, having its own part to play in the great work of
establishing and building up the kingdom of God. What gives it a place among the
redemptive acts of God is its Divine origination, taken in its widest sense, as inclusive of
all the divine operations, providential, gracious and expressly supernatural, by which it
has been made just what it is—a body of writings able to make wise unto salvation, and
profitable for making the man of God perfect. What gives it its place among the modes of
revelation is, however, specifically the culminating one of these Divine operations, which
we call ‘Inspiration’; that is to say, the action of the Spirit of God in so ‘bearing’ its
human authors in their work of producing Scripture, as that in these Scriptures they
speak, not out of themselves, but ‘from God.’ It is this act by virtue of which the
Scriptures may properly be called ‘God-breathed.’ 17
”15
 Ibid., p. 150.
16
 Ibid., p. 153.
17
 Ibid., p. 162.
It is apparent from looking at the whole presentation of Warfield’s argument that no
Roman Catholic, no Arminian, no liberal, nor neo-orthodox theologian could agree with
it. For Warfield, the inspiration of Scripture is the climax of a process of redemption in a
history which is what it is because at every point it is directed by the redemptive
providence of God. Of course, those who hold the Roman Catholic or the Arminian
concept of God and the world also believe in the “providence” of God, but they have a
view of providence which makes room for man as at least to some extent autonomous, a
man who can, in the last analysis, initiate historical events from his own resources
independent of the plan of God. Surely there could be no inspiration in the sense in which
Warfield describes it unless God’s providence is what he thinks of it as being, i.e., that
which controls all of history, and of each man as a particular contribution to history.
D. The Organic View Of Inspiration
Further, Warfield, and other Reformed theologians with him, have spoken of their
view of inspiration as the organic view. They do so because they stress the fact that the
Holy Spirit, in employing the instrumentality of men, takes these men as they are in
virtue of the general providence and common grace of God which has prepared them at
every point for the event of inspiration. The words that men speak can, on this basis, be at
the same time, the words of God. These men are, in the first place, wholly subject to the
will of God. From the point of view of neo-orthodoxy and liberalism, and even from the
point of view of the Arminian theology and Roman Catholicism, this involves a
mechanical or determinist view of the relation of the divine personality to the human
subject. The Reformed theologians, on the other hand, maintain that only if one places
man, as the Scriptures do, in the context of total dependence on God, in whom alone they
can live and move and have their being, can man be truly spontaneous in what he says
and does.
From the non-Reformed point of view man can be spontaneous only if he is, to some
extent, free from the determinative counsel of God. From the Reformed point of view
man is not spontaneous or free except as he acts within the counsel of God. From the
Reformed point of view the notion of freedom independent from the plan of God is
freedom in a vacuum. With such freedom man is free only negatively—he may go in any
direction he pleases but there can be for him no difference between east and west or north
or south; he cannot find himself because he has no self.
All attacks against this view of Warfield are based on the common presupposition of
human autonomy. But, we ask, will they attempt to stand on a foundation of pure
contingency to attack this view of God and Christ speaking in his word to sinful men? It
is clear that they will either stand upon the foundation of a sovereign God and his
providential revelatory word or they will stand on air. Rather, they will operate in a
vacuum.
On the other hand, the only way in which Warfield’s view of the Bible and its
inspiration can be defended is by pointing out that it is and has to be presupposed in order
that there be any intelligible human predication—whether for or against the truth of it. It
is therefore futile when men seek to attack this view and it is equally futile when men
seek to defend this view by means of argumentation which assumes its negation—human
dependence or autonomy. When men argue about the phenomena of Scripture as though
these phenomena were intelligible in terms of themselves, apart from the revelation of
God, before they approach the problem of its divinity or inspiration, then their attack or
defense is nothing but a beating in the air. To assume autonomous self-interpretation is to
negate the necessity of special revelation. The phenomena of Scripture are what they are
because they are a part of the redemptive work of God in the world. Again, when men
start their discussion of Scripture as a whole and of its inspiration in particular after
studying the phenomena outside Scripture, they may defend or they may attack but to no
avail because the whole battle is a battle in a vacuum. The phenomena outside, as well as
the phenomena inside the Scripture are what they are as part of the plan of history in
which God has ordered his work of redemption.
2. Herman Bavinck
We turn now to the work of Herman Bavinck, another Reformed theologian.
Bavinck holds to essentially the same view as that of Warfield. In short, Bavinck, as
well as Warfield, holds to an organic view of Scripture.
For Bavinck the Scripture constitutes the climax of the redemptive work of God
through Christ and his Spirit. The purpose of this redemptive work of Christ is that the
world which has fallen into sin may be cleansed from sin and in spite of that sin reveal
the glory of God. Mankind is not an aggregate of individuals. Mankind is an organism.
Revelation, in redeeming mankind, works organically 18
Working organically in accordance with the laws of creation, God’s redemption in
Christ may also be said to be through and through “personal.” “The center of revelation is
the person of Christ.” 19 All revelation is historical and not merely an insertion of
teaching or doctrine and all history has its center in Christ. There is an “orthodox
intellectualism” but Bavinck will have none of it. He shows that it does not spring from
anything that is taught in the Reformed Confessions.
A. Inscripturation
The inscripturation of the redemptive revelation of God through the person and work
of Christ could not possibly involve anything mechanical. On the contrary, inspiration is
“an element in revelation” and this revelation is personal and living throughout.
So far from seeking access to the person of Christ in spite of Scripture, it is
impossible to hear Christ except in Scripture. Instead of depreciating the Scripture we
should magnify it as the “last act in which the revelation of God in Christ for this
dispensation is completed.” 20 The redemptive revelation of God has now reached its
climax in the appearance of Christ and in his finished work. What he was and what he did
redemptively for the world, he himself has explained to us by giving his Spirit to the
apostles so that they should write down the meaning of his work. Herewith the objective
work of redemption has been finished. The Event of Christ has taken place and the
meaning of the event has been given to us by Christ himself in his Word. Henceforth the
18
 Gereformeerde Dogmatiek, Kampen 1918, Vol. 1, p. 399.
19
 Idem.
20
 Ibid., p. 402.
dispensation of the New Testament church appears upon the scene. In it the Spirit works
in the hearts of men so that they may believe the Word.
Thus the Scripture is the always “living youthful word, which God in our time
21 22
through His people gives to us.” In the Scripture “God comes daily to his people.”“The Scripture is the daily contact between heaven and earth, between Christ and his
church, between God and his children.” 23 The Scripture binds us not only to the past but
also to the living Lord in heaven who determined that past as well as the present and
future.
When Bavinck has thus in general terms described the Church doctrine of Scripture
and its inspiration he goes on, in the way that Warfield does, to speak of the Reformers.
He says, “the Reformers took the Scriptures and its theopneusty in the way that it had
been transmitted to them by the church.” 24
In this connection Bavinck refers to an article by Francis Pieper on Luther’s Doctrine
of Inspiration published in the Presbyterian and Reformed Review. 25 In this article Dr.
Pieper proved that the liberal theologians had no factual foundation in Luther’s writing
with which to support their claim that Luther’s view of Scripture was similar to their
own. Luther is far from admitting that “inaccuracies in historical details” can be found in
Scripture. 26 It was Dr. Tholuck who started the fiction that Luther had a loose view of
Scripture and many a liberal theologian has simply taken what Tholuck said at face value
without investigating Luther’s writings for themselves. 27 Summing up his whole
argument Pieper says that Luther “regards the Scripture in their every word as the very
word of God.” 28
As for Reformed theologians, they have generally followed Calvin in holding to the
same high view of Scripture which he held. 29 Calvin regards Scripture to be in the full
and literal sense the Word of God. 30
Bavinck admits that some Reformed theologians had a more or less mechanical view
of inspiration 31 and then sets forth his own view. It is, he argues, essentially the same as
that of the Reformers. If we believe the Bible when it speaks of the Trinity and the
incarnation, why should we not believe it when it speaks of its own inspiration? Only
God knows God and only God can tell us about God. 32 This has nothing to do with a
priorism. It is simply to believe God at his word. Bavinck prefers not to speak of a theory
of inspiration. It is the Holy Spirit of God who is everywhere operative in the cosmos. All
knowledge and art, all talent and genius, come from the Spirit of God. He regenerates
21
 Ibid., p. 405.
22
 Idem.
23
 Idem.
24
 Ibid., p. 435.
25
 April, 1893, p. 435 ff.
26
 Ibid., p. 264.
27
 Ibid., p. 261.
28
 Ibid., p. 266.
29
 Ibid., p. 436.
30
 Ibid., p. 436.
31
 Ibid., p. 436–437.
32
 Ibid., p. 446.
men so that they may believe and trust in him. He is back of the predictions that the
prophets of the Old Testament made. So also in the formation of Scripture he is the Spirit
of its inspiration. Thus the inspiration of the Scripture is organically related to all the
work of the Spirit in the world, both in providence and in redemption. The Holy Spirit
completes the work of the Father and of the Son in the world. 33 “In inspiration, revelation
completes itself, obtains its purpose and reaches its end.” 34 We are therefore to think of
inspiration not mechanically but organically, as merely another aspect of the Spirit’s
providential and redemptive work in the whole of history.
We have now heard two of the greatest of modern Reformed theologians set forth the
Scriptural teaching with respect to itself. The doctrine of Scripture is intricately
interwoven with all the main teaching of Scripture. This doctrine is interwoven with the
idea of the world’s creation and its all comprehensive providential control by God the
Father. We may say that the doctrine of creation and of providence form the foundation
of the idea of Scripture. But on the other hand we should know nothing about the truth of
creation and providence if it were not the Scripture as God’s Word that tells us of them.
Then, secondly, the doctrine of inspiration is interwoven with that of the historic
redemption of the world through Christ as the Son of God. The work of redemption
through Christ is also the foundation of the idea of Scripture. But again, it is true that we
should know nothing about the work of redemption through the Son unless the Scripture
as the Word of the Spirit tells us of it. Finally, the work of the Father and the work of the
Son and the work of the Spirit constitute the one work of the triune God. This we hold to
be true because by the regenerating power of the Spirit the saving work of Christ that he
wrought for us in history is applied to our hearts so that now we trust in him.
33
 Ibid., p. 450.
34
 Ibid., p. 451.
TheRomanChapter 4:
Catholic ViewOf Scripture
But to say that all this is the case is to say that the Protestant view of God and his
relation to man rather than the Roman Catholic one is true. As earlier noted, the Roman
Catholic view of theology is based upon the idea that man is to some extent free in the
sense of operating independently of the counsel of God. The Roman Catholic seeks to
establish the existence of God by proofs that are based upon the assumption of human
autonomy. By the method of Aristotle he reaches a god like the god of Aristotle, namely,
an abstract principle that stands, of necessity, in correlative relationship to the world.
When such a god has any contact with the world that god itself becomes an aspect of the
process of that world. Therefore the Roman Catholic establishes the divinity of Christ,
the second person of the Trinity, by a process of reasoning that again starts from human
autonomy. The consequence is that Romanism obtains a Christ who cannot identify
himself in history. When the Christ of Romanism becomes incarnate, he does so by a
process that continues in the church. The church is, for Romanism, the continuation of
the incarnation. This Christ cannot, in the nature of the case, give to man a final
interpretation of the meaning of his work. He could not authorize the Holy Spirit to
inspire the apostles in order to give a once-for-all revelation of the redemptive work of
the triune God. For Romanism the Holy Spirit too is a process; it is the process that
begins with Christ and continues in the interpretative work of the church and more
particularly in the infallible words of the Pope.
It is this Romish view of God taken partly from Scripture but at every point reduced
from its absoluteness by an admixture with it of Aristotelian philosophy that underlies the
Reformation argument with respect to the necessity, the authority, the clarity and the
sufficiency of redemptive revelation. It is man’s finitude more than his sin that is, for
Rome, the reason for the necessity of special revelation and for the necessity of the
Scriptures in which that special redemptive revelation comes to man. So far as this
revelation comes to man in Christ and then in the Bible, this revelation cannot, on this
view, be clear because Christ does not know in any absolute way who he is and what was
the meaning of his work. So the church starts from what it thinks of as the historic fact of
Christ’s appointment of Peter as head of the church. But this is an argument that is
admittedly based upon facts of history which have not themselves first been interpreted
by the revelation of God. So the authority thus founded is no greater than the foundation
on which it rests and this foundation is history, as interpreted by man apart from God. It
is history composed of chance produced material organized by would-be autonomous
man. And finally, on this view the revelation of Scripture cannot be sufficient in the sense
that nothing more is needed. God himself cannot tell us what is and what is not enough
for the needs of man.
1. The Formal Authority Of Scripture
In consequence of what has been said in the preceding paragraphs, it will be
necessary to conclude that the doctrine of Scripture and of its inspiration is only formally
the doctrine of the church of Rome. Bavinck says that the Bible has from the beginning
been recognized as the Word of God by all Christian churches. “There is,” he says, “no
dogma on which there is greater unity than that which pertains to the Scripture.” 1 But
both Warfield and Bavinck have shown us in the clearest possible way that the dogma of
Scripture is what it is because Christ is what he is and Christ is the center of Scripture.
One’s theology of Scripture is organically related to and is but the expression of one’s
theology as a whole. The inspiration of Scripture, as both Warfield and Bavinck have
stressed, is the climax of a process of redemptive revelation, and this redemptive
revelation is organically interwoven with revelation in the world as a whole. Therefore
one who does not believe this theology cannot consistently believe the Bible of this
theology.
2. The Pharisees
The necessity of speaking of formal rather than material agreement on the question of
Scripture can be readily made clear by unmasking the Pharisees as to what the Scripture
means to them. To the Pharisees of Jesus’ day the Scripture did not mean a finished
revelation. With all their elevation of Moses to virtual divinity their basic allegiance was
to the “living” Torah. It is precisely because this is the case that they could not find Jesus
Christ in Moses and the Prophets. Jesus tells them that Moses and the Prophets clearly
spoke of him. But they did not thus exegete the Scripture. Therefore their exegesis
virtually made their claim to being followers of Moses and the Prophets meaningless.
Their real allegiance was to what the “living” voice of their church taught them. And this
living voice was, to all intents and purposes, giving expression to the ethical ideas and
ideals that the apostate man had wrought out for itself.
3. Interpretation Of Scripture
Bavinck points out that the doctrine of the infallibility of Scripture was held from the
beginning in the Christian Church. Among others, Origen held to it. Origen, says
Bavinck, held that there was not a jot or a tittle in Scripture that was in vain. 2 But Origen
was a notorious heretic. He did not actually get his ideas of God, of man and of Christ
exclusively from Scripture. They are more in accord with Greek philosophy than they are
with biblical truth. So in Origen we have an illustration of the same sort of thing that we
saw was the case with the Pharisees. There was a theoretical adherence to a very high
view of Scripture but a practical denial of it.
The theology of the Middle Ages, says Bavinck, accepted the doctrine of the Bible
handed down to it from the early church and added nothing new.
4. Thomas Aquinas
Naturally it is of special interest to see what Thomas Aquinas, the great teacher of the
Roman Catholic Church, has to say about Scripture. He deals with it in his teaching with
1
 Op. Cit., p. 422.
2
 Ibid., p. 424.
respect to prophecy. According to Thomas no “error or untruth can be found in
Scripture.” 3
However, what was said with respect to the Pharisees applies, mutatis mutandis, also
to Thomas and to the medieval position in general. It is the “living” voice of the church
that constitutes the final authority for Thomas. It is Aristotle plus Christ who together are
called upon to construe the truth with respect to God and man. Thus allegiance to
Scripture and its authority again becomes a formal matter.
5. The Council Of Trent
If we want a formally fine view with respect to the inspiration of Scripture, we may
well listen to the Council of Trent. This Council extends the idea of the inspiration of the
Bible so as to include tradition. Says Bavinck: “Inspiration is here indeed extended to
tradition but at any rate it is also clearly asserted of Scripture.” 4 But surely we can take
little comfort from this fact. Is it a great comfort to a husband when his wife says that she
loves him too—as well as the man across the street?
When the infallible church accords infallibility to the Scripture, the church stands
above the Scripture. Says Charles Hode, “Making tradition a part of the rule of faith
subverts the authority of Scripture.” 5
6. G. C. Berkouwer On Romanism And Scripture
A more recent discussion of the Roman Catholic view of Scripture by Dr. G. C.
Berkouwer corroborates anew the fact that this view includes nothing more than a formal
recognition of the Scripture as the very Word of God.
The Bible and the church, are, says Berkouwer, according to the Council of Trent,
coordinate. 6 This at once excludes the Protestant idea of the exclusive authority of
Scripture. 7 The Roman Church found it to be obviously impossible to find any
justification in Scripture for many of its teachings and practices. It therefore needed a
second source of divine revelation next to the Bible. Thus, for instance, the church’s
teaching with respect to purgatory is frankly traced back to tradition rather than to
Scripture.
Involved in the idea of tradition is that of Papal infallibility. The Church could not
and did not give any clear declaration with respect to the material content of tradition.
The idea of tradition necessitated the idea of the “living” voice of the church in order to
indicate from moment to moment both the content and the meaning of tradition. And
herewith the authority of Scripture is again reduced to formality in the way that the
Pharisees reduced their adherence to the Law to a formality.
Roman Catholics therefore find their final norm of objectivity in the declaration of
the teaching living church, while Protestants find their norm in the final revelation of
3
 Bavinck, Op. Cit., p. 40.
4
 Ibid., p. 428.
5
 Systematic Theology, Vol. 1, p. 128.
6
 Het Probleem der Schriftkritiek, p. 222.
7
 Idem.
Christ through the Scripture. The church claims that to have genuinely objective truth
available to man there must be the voice of the living Church. The Protestant holds that if
one’s final appeal is to such a living voice we have to all intents and purposes fallen back
on the wisdom of man; the natural man is dead in trespasses and sins.
7. The Place Of The Holy Spirit In Roman Catholicism
To be sure, the church constantly speaks of the Holy Spirit as assisting the church,
and in particular the Pope, in giving expression to infallible truth. But in thus appealing to
the special guidance of the Holy Spirit, this Spirit must first be denied as being the Spirit
of the Christ who has finished and explained his work of atonement for men. The Spirit
of Christ guided the Apostles of Christ in giving final expression to the meaning of his
person and work. But if there is no finished work of Christ, i.e., if the sacrifice of Christ
is continued in the mass, then, of course, the Spirit of Christ himself becomes a part of
the process of redemption. There is then no qualitative difference between the inspiration
which the writers of Scripture enjoyed, as they were preparing the deposit of Scripture,
and the illumination that all believers enjoy as they read this revelation given them by the
servants of Christ. But more than that, this guidance of the Spirit is then itself relativized
so that it is nothing more than some form of assistance to men who are, apart from
redemption through Christ, already able properly to seek for truth and righteousness in
and of themselves. At the end of the process, says Berkouwer, we have a Christ-
mysticism which cuts itself loose from the Word of Christ.
Chapter 5:
Neo-orthodoxy And Christ Mysticism
Of even more pressing significance for Protestantism is the fact that Christ-
mysticism, more definitely exclusive of the authority of Christ and the Scripture than that
of Romanism, has arisen in its own midst. We refer to the Act theology of Neo-
Orthodoxy. The great exponent of neo-orthodox theology is Karl Barth. Through many
years he has claimed to set forth a true theology of the Word in the way that the reformers
did and for that reason he has, for many years, opposed the “and-theology” of Rome.
Barth wants no natural and revealed theology. He wants a theology that springs
exclusively from the Bible. His is a theology of the Word. Over against the older
Liberals, Barth would hold, not that the Bible contains, but that it is the Word of God.
For all this seeming return to the position of the Reformers, it is clear that Barth’s
position is a theology of the living voice of the church. Barth interprets the Bible in a
modern activist sense just as Origen interpreted the Bible in accord with principles
borrowed from Greek philosophy. When therefore Barth says that the Bible is the Word
of God he means nothing like what either Luther or Calvin meant when they said the
same thing. In Barth’s case we have the purest of formal adherence to the Protestant
principle of a once for all revelation of God in Christ. For if there is anything that is true
of Barth’s theology as a whole it is that it is the diametrical opposite of a theology that is
based on a finished revelation of God in history. The Christ of Barth on which his whole
theology rests is identical with the idea of Event. God is the Event of his revelation to
man in Christ and man is the event of being taken up into this great Christ Event. The
whole of Barth’s theology is therefore process theology with a vengeance. If for
Romanism the church is the continuation of the incarnation, this is even more obviously
the case with the theology of Barth. God is the Event of revelation in Christ and Christ is
the work of saving men and the work of saving men is not finished till all men are saved.
Even when men are lost it is that they are lost by virtue of their non-being in this process
Christ. If Romanism deserves to be called Christ Mysticism, then neo-orthodox theology
also deserves to be thus called, but doubly so. Surely then when Barth says that the Bible
is the Word of God, he is not reacting against liberalism’s progress idea. He is going
beyond it in terms of a modern activist philosophy of which liberalism never dreamed.
1. The Isolation Of The Reformed View Of Scripture
The conclusion of the matter is that we are compelled to speak with Berkouwer of the
isolation of the Reformed view of Scripture. If we are to avoid having a merely formal
adherence to the idea of the Scriptures as the very Word of God, we must have such a
God as the Scriptures reveal. The God whom the Scriptures reveal is the God of whom no
man knows anything unless this God himself reveals himself.
This means first that the world itself and all that is in it is revelational of God. In
particular it means that man as created in the image of God is revelational. It means that
all revelation is personal. Even before man became a sinner God was already speaking to
him personally. This indicates that revelation in the world of nature was at no time
sufficient or clear in itself apart from the Word revelation of God to man.
It is this conception that all the facts of the world, man as fact along with every fact of
his environment, is revelational in connection with and in subordination to the Word
communication of God that underlies what Bavinck and Warfield speak of as the organic
view of revelation and inspiration.
We may call this view of God and his relation to the world the covenantal view. As
such it is exhaustively personal. There is no area in which man finds himself confronted
with impersonal fact or law. All so-called impersonal laws and all so-called uninterpreted
facts are what they are because they are expressive of the revelation of God’s will and
purpose.
A. The Cosmic Extent Of Revelation
In the nature of the case, the purpose of redemptive revelation is cosmic in extent. It
is not as though there were any area of life about which God’s revelation given in
Scripture does not say anything. Scripture speaks of ever the fact in the universe. It says
of all these facts that they are what hey are either consciously or unconsciously because
of their relation to Christ the Redeemer of the world.
Such an interpretation of all the facts of the world as related negatively or positively,
consciously or unconsciously to the Christ who died and rose again from the dead in
Jerusalem can, in the nature of the case, at no point be thought of by man apart from this
revelation. Man must accept this interpretation of the whole of the cosmos on the
authority of Christ or he must reject it in toto. If he rejects it he then accepts himself as
the final reference point in all predication.
Now it is only in the Reformed Confessions that such a view of God and of his
relation to man through Christ finds expression. In all other Confessions there is a
measure of compromise with the idea that man is free, i.e., independent to some extent, of
control by the will and counsel of God. In all other Confessions there is a toning down of
the fact that man is, as a sinner, unwilling to submit himself wholly in all his
interpretation of life to the authority of Christ speaking in his Word.
The Reformed view of Scripture is that it might and would become the most formal
view of all views unless it is held in burning personal conviction to be true and
indispensable for life and for death. 1 Abraham Kuyper believed strongly in the
infallibility of Scripture because he was convinced that only in it do men have the living
God speaking to them. This must imply that those who hold it must hold it because they
are convinced that all the interpretation that man gives of life in any dimension is built on
sinking sand unless it is built on God speaking through Christ in his Word. He who
believes in the Scriptures as the Word in which God is speaking to man today must
believe that God is speaking in it to the scientist and to the philosopher as well as to the
theologian, requiring them, one and all, to bring their thought into obedience to him. “For
this reason, no one,” says Berkouwer, “can be satisfied with a formal confession of the
authority of Scripture. One’s whole theological thinking must constantly be seen to be in
2 3
accord with it.” Submission to Scripture and criticism cannot go hand in hand.1
 Berkouwer, Op.2
 Ibid., p. 298.
3
 Idem.
Cit., p. 298.
To those who are committed to the position which interprets man in terms of a
supposedly intelligent procedure not based on biblical principles, this Reformed view will
seem to be hopelessly unscientific. The answer to this must be that the procedure of
science and the procedure of philosophy cannot be shown to be intelligible unless they
are carried on on the presupposition of the God who speaks to man in Scripture. He who
holds to the Reformed view of Scripture does so because he has learned by means of it to
see that he is blind to the situation in the world as it is without the light of Scripture. The
world is actually created and controlled by God. Man is actually a fallen sinner who is
blind to these facts unless he is born again by the Holy Spirit. When born again he sees
all the truth at once. He sees the truth about himself and his spiritual blindness and he
ascribes the fact that he now sees to the work of God through Christ as it is revealed to
him in Scripture.
Of course, says Berkouwer, infallibility is never claimed for any translation. It is
claimed only for the autographs. 4 This is all the more reason for seeking a more and
more accurate Bible translation. Those who rely finally, as does the Roman Church, on
the Pope, need not concern themselves too much with seeking to approach ever more
closely to the original.
Holding to the infallibility of the autographa also leads to a diligent search for better
text of Scripture, a text that more clearly approaches the originals. Berkouwer here refers
to A. Kuyper’s work, Encyclopaedie der Heilige Godgeleerdheid. 5 Berkouwer does not
in this connection discuss the charge frequently made that lost autographa are useless.
But the answer often given is quite sufficient. The important point is not whether or not
we now possess the autographa but whether they have actually existed. Without them
there is no Christ who has spoken anywhere in history. With them we have such a Christ.
With them we have many problems of text and translation but no ultimate meaningless
mystery, such as we would have without them.
The most important point with respect to the Reformed view of Scripture is that it
unreservedly interprets the phenomena of Scripture in terms of the claims that it makes
for itself. This point has already been referred to when we were setting forth the views of
Warfield and Bavinck. On any but the Reformed view of theology there is an area of life
which man may interpret correctly before he even as much as looks into Scripture. And
this is fatal for the idea of a truly Protestant view of Scripture. As the Word of God,
Scripture is like the sun in the light of which all things are seen and without the light of
which nothing is seen for what it is. When they who attack or when they who defend the
Bible as the infallible Word of God engage in an argument not based upon the
presupposition of the Bible as the infallible Word of God, the Reformed Christian will
not join either side. However much his sympathy will be with the party defending the
Scripture as against those who attack it, he simply must not join the fray. To join the fray
is to admit that the Word of God is not the Word of God. If it is the Word of God, it alone
is the final light and only source of light with respect to any fact in the world. In the
Scripture, divine inspiration takes that which is human into its service, with the result that
the infallible Word of God appears. 6
4
 Ibid., p. 300.
5
 Vol. 3, 1 p. 64.
6
 Ibid., p. 326.
Chapter 6:
Modern Attacks On Scripture
We turn now to a brief discussion of the modern debate about the Bible and its
inspiration. The story of this debate has often been told. We look only at certain
important aspects of it.
First we look at the attack made on Scripture and then we note the defense of
Scripture made by believers in it as the Word of God against those who attack it.
1. The Natural Man
Basic to an understanding of the whole attack on Scripture is the fact that the natural
man hates Christ and therefore hates Christ’s Word as it makes its claims upon him in
Scripture. Both Bavinck and Warfield bring out this point. Speaking of the Scripture
Bavinck says: “Because it is the inscripturation of the revelation of God in Christ, it must
arouse the same opposition as Christ himself.” 1 Christ has come to separate light from
darkness. He has come to reveal the thoughts of men to themselves. Through his Word he
brings men to a consciousness of their sin and evil. And the sinner, still under the control
of the prince of the power of darkness, rebels against this Word of Christ as it challenges
him to repentance from sin. The natural man does not understand the things of the Spirit.
They are discerned only by those who, through the Holy Spirit, are born again from their
spiritual death.
2. Two Classes Of Men
It is to be expected then that the natural man does not agree with what has just been
said about him. He does not for a moment admit that believers in the Bible and in the
Christ of the Bible can and do see anything that they themselves are not equally able to
see. The natural man is blind to his own blindness. What do these people think of
themselves? Do they think that they are better than we are? As for their claims that they
are born again, our psychologists can explain that this rebirth of theirs is a natural
phenomenon. When they appeal to the Holy Spirit as the source of this rebirth our
philosophers can show that many who are not believers in Christ have had visions of the
Holy Spirit as influencing them to sudden conversions. Further, if they go back of this to
speak of Christ as the Son of God and of his resurrection, our theologians can explain this
faith too as being similar to what men of other religions believe.
The whole of the so called Higher Criticism of Scripture springs from this
background in modern science, philosophy and theology as it is based upon the
assumption of human self-sufficiency. Of course the opposition to the Scriptures did not
begin in modern times. All men are and have been apostate from God since the fall of
Adam. All men of themselves therefore resist the light of the gospel till, by the Spirit of
1
 Op. Cit., p. 465.
God, this light overpowers them. Then, like the Apostle Paul, they become “apostles”
instead of persecutors.
3. Common Grace And Bernard Ramm
The Roman Catholic and the Arminian think that in thus insisting on the idea of the
total blindness of the natural man we do the natural man an injustice. Is there not much in
the way of high morality and of intellectual accomplishment among those who are not
Christians? What of all the modern scientific enterprise? Are you not going beyond your
own great theologians when you speak in such absolutist terms? Did not Calvin have
great appreciation for the truths discovered by the Greeks and for the works of
consummate artistic power that they produced? Dr. Bernard Ramm says that we cannot
be “hyperorthodox and ignore the enormous accumulations of valid information by
modern science.” 2 And what about the position of Dr. Francis L. Patton who was
president of Princeton Theological Seminary in the day when it was unreservedly
Reformed in its theology? Patton opposes the idea of separating the people of, this world
into two classes the way you did above. If you say what you have said about the natural
man, namely, that he is blind, there is no further use to present the claims of the gospel to
him. The blind man cannot read. Are we to conclude that all men are blind? “Does it
satisfy the requirements of duty to divide the world into two classes consisting of those
who are blind and cannot read and those who can see and need not read?” Patton sums up
his estimate of a two-class theory of the human race by saying: “I confess that after a life-
time of belief in the Calvinistic theology as the most rational and the most Scriptural of
all systems of religious thought, I am not prepared to accept this interpretation of it.” 3
Speaking in similar vein, Ramm says, “But a pedantic hyperorthodoxy must not be
allowed to speak for evangelical Christians as such a position as it holds is impossible of
credible defense.” 4
What shall we say to this? Our answer must be that we are simply following Scripture
in our analysis of the natural man. The Roman Catholic and the Arminian are unwilling
to do this. Moreover, as for the cultural products of those who are not Christians, we
would follow Calvin in ascribing this to the common grace of God that works in them.
True, the natural man is not blind in every sense. True, he is not as bad as he could be and
as he will one day be. Modern science, so far as it has been carried on by those who are
not Christians, has made marvelous discoveries of the true state of affairs in the
phenomenal world. But the whole point—which even Patton and Ramm seem to
overlook in a moment of forgetfulness—is that unless it were for the common grace of
God there would be no discovery of any truth and no practice of any goodness among
those who are not born again.
A further point needs to be made. Patton argues as though he who holds to what he
calls an extreme view on the blindness of the natural man is presuming to enter into the
2
 The Christian View of Science and the Scripture, Grand Rapids, 1954, p. 37.
3
 Ibid., p. 160.
4
 Op. Cit., p. 28.
hidden things of God, as though those who believe in total depravity were presuming to
judge the hearts of men. 5
Still further Patton thinks that all apologetic discussion must stop if we think of the
natural man as wholly blind. He says that if we hold such a low view of the non-Christian
we should be taking “Christianity outside the sphere of inquiry.”
Positively, this last point means that Patton’s view of Scripture, and of its place in the
Christian’s responsibility for the conversion of his fellow men, is a part of his general
view of apologetics. This general view of apologetics is the same as that of Bishop
Butler. Patton is outspokenly a follower of Butler in his probability view of apologetics.
Says Patton: “Probability is the guide of life, said Bishop Butler. The best ships afloat
may be sunk at sea, but on that account do you take one known not to be seaworthy?” 6
So the “real problem is whether the Bible is true, not whether it is inspired.” 7
Having gone this far Patton is driven to go further. How shall the truthfulness of
Scripture be established? Patton answers this by asking some rhetorical questions: “Have
we lost all faith in inductive logic? Have we abandoned human testimony as a source of
information? Is there no longer a place for the common sense of mankind?” 8 We are,
according to Patton, to determine the historical credibility of the Scriptures apart from the
question of their inspiration. Then, when we have established their credibility, we can add
the idea of inspiration. “I like to feel that this historicity and the inspiration of the Bible
cooperate and help to strengthen the Christian faith, so that if either is sufficient how
much better will both be.” 9
Moreover, when we follow the Butler method of apologetic, according to Patton, we
can escape the charge of assuming what we prove. 10 And when finally we note the
Protestant view of Scripture (and especially Calvin’s view which implies the internal
witness of the Holy Spirit as the final source of the certainty of its divinity) we need not
deny that “something like it is found among the Hegelian thinkers and the Mystics.” 11
We need only to say then that what is taught by the Hegelian and the mystic is “better
taught and authoritatively taught in Holy Scripture.” 12
We shall be concerned with this Butler type of defense of the idea of Scripture below.
For the moment a general objection must be made with respect to it. Butler was Arminian
in his theology. He was, therefore, quite consistent in advocating the sort of apologetics
that he did. Holding an Arminian view of theology involves holding a basically formal
view of the Scripture and its inspiration. We have seen earlier what this means in the case
of Roman Catholicism. It involves the idea of what Ramm calls a “pattern of authority”
5
 Op. Cit., p. 160.
6
 Ibid., p. 165.
7
 Ibid., p. 147.
8
 Ibid., p. 147.
9
 Ibid., p. 166.
10
 Ibid., p. 168.
11
 Ibid., p. 158.
12
 Idem.
in his book on the subject. 13 Such a pattern of authority steers, we are told, a wise course
between subjectivism and authoritarianism. 14
The idea of the Pattern of Authority, says Ramm, does not “deny the right to test the
15 16
truthfulness of various options.” “Reason lays bare the grounds of authority.”Christianity is “capable of univocal definition.” 17
In the pattern of authority, we are told, is “Authority which is objective and
subjective” and “which combines the imperial majesty of God, the sovereign right of
truth, and the dignity of man.” 18
We shall see later how it is this idea of a pattern of authority by which Ramm seeks to
defend both the Bible and the rightful claims we must make for scientific procedure. For
the moment it must suffice to call attention to the fact that Butler’s approach, as followed
by both Patton and Ramm, does not have the organic view of Scripture set forth in the
works of Warfield and Bavinck. Now there is no doubt that both Patton and Ramm
basically hold to the same organic view of Scripture that Warfield and Bavinck hold It is
also true that Warfield, as well as Patton and Ramm, holds to a form of the Butler type of
argument for the defense of Scripture and its teachings. But the moral of all this is that by
their use of Butler’s method, they who hold to the Reformed or organic view of Scripture
bring this view into jeopardy. They bring it into jeopardy because they appeal to a
common ground of interpretation between the believer and unbeliever of the facts of
nature and of history.
In concluding this section we should be remiss if we did not refer to other writings of
Ramm. There is his book, Special Revelation And The Word Of God. There is too, his
book, The Witness Of The Holy Spirit. The approach taken in these works, particularly in
the latter, is quite different from that taken in the works above discussed. Reviewing the
last-named book professor John Murray says: “It is indicative of Ramm’s perspective that
the three theologians to whom he yields particular esteem are John Calvin, Abraham
Kuyper and B. B. Warfield.” 19
In speaking of Ramm’s point of view as expressed in this book Murray adds: “The
keynote of the thesis is enunciated when we read as follows: ‘The conclusion, then, is
that in the Christian certainty is not derived from the rational powers of the human mind,
nor from the word of the imperial church, nor from the direct delivery of a revelation
within the hearts. Rather, it comes only from the testimonium Spiritus sancti.’ ” 20
With this evaluation of Murray’s we concur. And we believe that what Ramm says in
this book is far more true to Scripture than what he says in The Pattern of Authority.
13
 The Pattern of Authority, Grand Rapids, 1957, p. 24.
14
 Ibid., p. 18.
15
 Ibid., p. 42.
16
 Ibid., p. 44.
17
 Ibid., p. 57.
18
 Ibid., p. 62.
19
 Westminster Theological Journal, Vol. 23, p. 194.
20
 Idem.
4. Non-Christian Science
We shall now look very briefly at modern science, modern philosophy and modern
theology in order to see what their objection is to the Bible with its teaching, and
therefore to the doctrine of biblical inspiration as discussed above.
Dealing first with science, we accept the distinction made by Dr. Enno Wolthuis
between science “as no more than a technique” and science as “an interpretation of
nature.” “For example,” says Wolthuis, “anyone who studies the behavior of electrons
must conclude, simply on the basis of experimental data, that they possess wave
properties similar to those of light.” 21 Surely, no Christian, says Wolthuis, should have a
quarrel with science in this sense. With this we can of course have hearty agreement.
Everybody must use legs in order to walk. Everyone must follow the rule of formal logic
if he is going to reason straight. When a man is born again he does not get a new set of
brains with which to think. He has all the gifts of nature in common with his friend the
unbeliever.
However, when we speak of modern science we are not speaking of a technique but
rather of an interpretation of nature and of man’s relation to nature. Wolthuis himself has
a chapter headed “Science Shapes the Modern Mind.” In this chapter he speaks of “the
scientific method.” Of it he says that in modern times this has meant the giving of a large
place to experiment. But this at once led to the formulation of natural law. The object of
the scientific method is to uncover the relationships existing among the things observed
and to express these relationships in the form of natural laws. Generally there has been no
other motive than to explain nature in terms of nature. That is to say, man is surrounded
by, and is part of, nature which is assumed to contain an orderly arrangement of cause-
effect relations and it is his function to discover this order and leave it at that. “Ulterior
motives have no place in such a science for they distort the voice of nature and make it
impossible to see it for what really is.” 22
itThese words are enough to indicate that when we speak of science we are not
speaking merely of a technique of experimentation as such but rather of an attempt to
understand nature for what it really is, there are two mutually exclusive interpretations.
Wolthuis himself contrasts the two positions by speaking of the position of modern
science as being the product of man’s “own reason” and of the position of the Christian
as that which is given him by the authority of Scripture. Says Wolthuis, “Man of himself
cannot find God through science, but neither can he know nature for what it really is,
namely, a revelation of God. The word, revelation, is not properly in his vocabulary for,
as we mean the term, it is the conscious, wilful and purposeful act of the personal God,
and expression of His being and purpose. A complete and proper interpretation of nature
must see it as the product of the creative act of God, as upheld by His providential
concern for it, and as existing to fulfil His purpose through it.” 23
For our purpose nothing more need be said on this point. The Christian knows from
Scripture that the created world shows forth clearly the power and divinity of God.
Calvin has laid all possible stress on this point in his Institutes. Man, says Calvin, has no
21
 Science, God and You, Grand Rapids, 1965, p. 67.
22
 Ibid., p. 40.
23
 Ibid., p. 65.
excuse if he does not see the hand of the Creator in the created world. To be sure, nature
is not and never was sufficient by itself to give man a thorough knowledge of it in
relation to God. Even before sin entered into the world God the Creator spoke to Adam,
the creature made in his image, with respect to nature and what man should do with it.
Man was told, in effect, to be religiously engaged when he was making his
experimentation in the laboratory as well as when he is singing psalms in the church on
Sunday. If then science deals with the laws of nature it does give an interpretation of the
facts. If the scientist does not see the laws of nature as manifesting the Creator redeemer,
he is guilty before God.
As a sinner man seeks to suppress the revelation of God that speaks to him through
the created world. He holds under the truth in unrighteousness. And when modern
science is trying to understand nature without placing it, from the outset, in relation to its
creator and redeemer it is engaged in the sinful enterprise of repression. The world is
God’s estate. You do not make experiments and then formulate laws with respect to the
facts and relations of facts on a section of a man’s estate and yet ignore the fact that every
fact and every relation between facts on that estate is precisely what it is because of the
plan and governance of the owner and creator of the estate. To be sure you may hold back
the truth that it is indeed an estate and thus organized by its owner, but is it possible to
understand and know truly the facts in the estate while yet resisting the knowledge about
the owner and creator? You will only know the facts “truly” in such a case insofar as you
have not thought out ultimate relations. However, if this ultimate relation is denied and/or
supplanted by some other ultimate relation, the whole “system” of facts and laws is
misconceived and therefore ultimately false. You may indeed represent one section of the
estate correctly, but this is in spite of your misconception of the ultimate relation, and
indeed, “true” only when considered separate from such ultimate postulates.
Modern science as a whole assumes that what Christianity teaches with respect to
nature cannot be true. Experimentation, we are told, needs or presupposes the idea of an
open universe. Immanuel Kant’s position with respect to the idea of pure contingency
underlies the method of the average non-Christian scientist today. The ideas of creation
and of providence as controlling all that comes to pass is therefore assumed to be
intolerable. The idea of experiment, we are told, assumes that at the beginning of one’s
research one hypothesis is as good as another. If the Christian therefore wants to get a
hearing for his ideas of creation and providence he must present them as one hypothesis
among many. But how can the Christian do this without betraying his own most basic
conviction? His own conviction is to the effect that the possibility of successful scientific
procedure depends upon the idea that God through Christ controls whatsoever comes to
pass. Nature is orderly because it is the order of God that appears in it. He who does not
hold this to be true has not seen nature for what it is. Nature apart from God is, for the
Christian, a meaningless term. The non-Christian must tell us how he will make it
meaningful apart from God in Christ.
Again, modern science holds not only to the idea of pure contingency or
indeterminacy, but also to that of pure determinism. Modern science insists that the order
which it discovers cannot be that of a God who wills it to be a certain way. The order of
nature, we are told, is what it is because of an impersonal unchangeable regularity. 24
24
 Cf. Morris Cohen, Reason and Nature.
5. A Christian Philosophy Of Nature
When therefore Ramm finds it necessary to discover a Christian philosophy of nature
we can only agree with him. 25 When he adds that it is particularly needful for Protestant
Christians to have a philosophy of nature that accords with their own religious
convictions, we again concur. When, however, we watch him in his pioneering effort to
find such a philosophy of nature we are disappointed. He offers nothing in the way of a
philosophy of nature that is basically different from a Roman Catholic philosophy of
nature. “By a Christian philosophy of nature we mean,” says Ramm, “a broad,
comprehensive method and system of the interpretation of Nature receiving its
orientation from Christian theology.” 26 But Ramm does not use the Protestant or more
particularly the Reformed doctrines of God’s revelation in nature and in man as the
presupposition for the possibility of scientific procedure. Ramm does not challenge the
modern scientific method based as it is upon the Kantian assumptions of pure
contingency and pure formal rationality by means of the Christian scheme of things at all.
Ramm looks back with longing eyes to the synthesis scheme that Thomas Aquinas
effects between nature and grace. When Thomas talks about the will of God as being the
cause of all things Ramm does not see that in saying this Thomas is still under the control
of the potentiality-actuality scheme of Aristotle. God’s will as the cause of all things
means for Thomas nothing more than that God’s being participates in the realm of
temporal being. 27 Soon Ramm works out an idea of “progressive creation” which does
not in any significant sense differ from the Thomistic synthesis of Aristotelian and
Christian thought. As he wants a pattern of revelation which has two loci, the objective
and the subjective, so Ramm wants a pattern of progressive creation, in which God is the
world ground and his spirit, the Holy Spirit, the “innermost thought on Nature.”
“Progressive creation is the means whereby God as world ground and the Spirit of God as
World Entelechy bring to pass the divine will in Nature.” 28
Ramm does not clearly set the Christian position with respect to nature as the theater
of the revelation of God’s creative and redemptive work over against the position of
nature as composed of brute facts ordered by the mind of man as autonomous. Ramm
speaks vaguely of “scientists as have a prejudice against teleological thinking.” But the
natural man need have no prejudice against teleological thinking such as Aristotle offers
him and such as underlies the Roman Catholic philosophy of nature. 29 Wolthuis has no
leanings toward the Roman Catholic synthesis. But he too fails to see the basic character
of the struggle between modern science and Christianity. He overlooks the all-important
fact that God’s revelation in nature was, from the outset, supplemented by Word
revelation. Then further he fails to note that the non-believer, as well as the believer, is
confronted with the revelation of God. All the facts of this world, says Wolthuis, “are
God’s creation and exist for His purpose.” But then, unfortunately, he adds “this is
25
 Op. Cit., p. 102.
26
 Ibid., p. 102.
27
 See Arthur Lovejoy, The Great Chain of Being.
28
 Ibid., p. 115, 116.
29
 Ibid., p. 56.
important information only available to, and recognized by, the Christian, who is required
to reckon with it in his science.” If it is available only to the Christian, then the non-
Christian cannot be held accountable for not recognizing it.
Of course it is true that the fact that nature is wholly revelational of God is not
recognized by the non-believer. But this is because he does not want to recognize it. The
fact that nature reveals God is there to be seen as surely as the sun is in the sky. The
availability of this fact is present for all men equally. But the sinner resists the truth about
himself and nature as created and directed toward God. He resists the truth, which presses
in on him, in unrighteousness. He does so when he assumes that the scientific enterprise
requires a universe both of change and of determinism.
It is only when we look at nature as actually revealing God and at the sinner as
unwilling to see this fact, that the real problem of the relation between science and the
Bible appears. The battle is not one primarily of this fact or of that fact. The battle is
basically with respect to a philosophy of facts. The non-believer virtually makes a
universal negative proposition about God every time he engages in his scientific effort.
Even when he thinks teleologically in the way that Aristotle did and proves the existence
of a God, he is still assuming that God is not and cannot be the Creator and Redeemer of
the world.
6. Modern Philosophy
In all this we have already been dealing with philosophy as well as with science. No
one can be a scientist in any intelligible way without at the same time having a
philosophy of reality as a whole. Christian apologists often speak of scientism as being
objectionable but of science as being innocent with respect to the claims of Christianity.
But surely this cannot be the case. Anyone who has a philosophy of nature that is not
based upon the presupposition of what the Bible says about nature at the same time has a
view of God that is hostile to that which Christianity proclaims. Frequently Christian
apologists plead with the scientists for a hearing by saying that they are merely offering
something additional to what the scientist himself offers. Science, say these apologetes,
gives us truth as far as it goes, but it does not include the spiritual aspect of reality in its
vision. So Christianity merely asks men to see that they must add the person-to-person or
spiritual dimension to that of the impersonal and mechanical. After all, these apologetes
say, science deals and can deal only with the quantitative aspects of reality. It is faith and
faith only that has a vision for spiritual things. And then it is added that science, too,
needs to build itself on faith. Did not Aristotle show how all first principles are adopted
by faith? The fact that logic applies to reality is something that all men must believe, is it
not? So then Christians are only doing what non-Christians do. Both put faith in
something.
In this whole approach it is forgotten that the question is not one of having or not
having faith but of having the proper faith. Of course all men start from faith. But the
point is that the non-Christian starts from faith in man as not a creature of God and as not
a sinner before God, while the Christian starts with his faith in Christ. It is the object of
faith that gives meaning to the faith one professes. There are only two alternatives. The
object of the non-Christian’s faith is man as autonomous, while the object of the
Christian’s faith is God as revealed in Christ and in Christ as revealed in Scripture.
“There is no person on earth,” says Wolthuis, “who lives without faith of some sort.” 30
This is true, but it is not true that therefore the Christian’s faith stands on a par with the
non-Christian’s faith as far as validity is concerned. It is the Christian’s faith in God as
revealed in Christ that is true faith. It alone gives an intelligible foundation to scientific
procedure. The Christian and the non-Christian position are never to be thought of as
intellectually on a par with one another. The Christian’s faith is not a blind faith, as is the
faith of the non-Christian. The non-Christian scientist may and does believe in the
presence of order, but he has no warrant for doing so: His assumed philosophy of chance
points to the opposite. The Christian’s position is not merely just as good as the non-
Christian’s position. Christianity is the only position that does not per se take away the
very foundation for intelligible scientific and philosophical procedure. Christianity is the
only “rational” faith! Modern philosophy, like modern science, is based upon the man-
centered approach of Kant, and Kant’s philosophy is merely a good modern philosophical
expression of the self-dependence exhibited in Paradise in the Fall. For Kant the world
offers man an infinite, indeterminate manifold of possible experience. That is to say, the
world must not be thought of as created by God, as controlled by the Spirit of Providence
and as redeemed by Christ. Then, secondly, man is assumed not to be a creature made in
God’s image but to be self-existing. This self-existing and therefore self-sufficient and
self-defining man imposes the categories of his understanding on the raw stuff of
experience. By thinking of the human mind as the source of the ordering of the universe
Kant thinks he has saved science and made room for religion. According to Kant science
was impossible on either an empiricist or a rationalist basis. On an empiricist basis there
was nothing but an infinity of unrelated facts, of things in themselves. The mind had to
think of order as being operative in these things in themselves but could not account for
this order. Man’s mind just received what came to it and could not in any sense control
the nature of what it received. For empiricism the world about man was like an infinity of
beads no two of which could be strung as far as man’s knowledge of the world was
concerned. On the other hand, in rationalism the world was conceived of as one absolute
being in which all the facts are rationally related but as rationally related in independence
of the knowledge or activity of man. So the world was again unknown to man. Besides,
how could there be any rational order unless all were reduced to order in the way that
Parmenides had reduced all to order? That is to say, the assumption of the rationalist
procedure was like the assumption of Parmenides, namely, that there had to be
individuation by complete description. But man cannot individuate by complete
description, only God can do that but a God who individuates by complete description is
wholly beyond the understanding of man. Man could have no univocal knowledge of
such a God at all.
Kant himself says that on the basis of empiricism we can have only brute facts and
more brute facts but no systematic relation between them. He adds that on the basis of
rationalism we would have only order, but it would be merely the idea of order without
any ordering of facts. Kant sought to remedy the situation by means of his Copernican
revolution. No one had ever conceived the idea that the mind itself was doing the
ordering even as it was doing the observing. Facts cannot be observed, argues Kant,
except they are observed as being incorporated into systemic arrangement. So it is the
30
 Op. Cit., p. 48.
mind itself that imposes its categories of substance and causality upon nature even as it
observes nature. Nature means causally related facts. And causally related facts are brute
facts observed and arranged by the mind of man.
Thus the whole knowledge transaction with respect to nature is complete without any
reference to God. More than that, God must not interfere with this knowledge process. If
he does interfere, there is no more knowledge, properly speaking.
Yes, indeed, Kant thinks that he has made room for faith even as he has limited
science. For by thinking of man as the source of the ordering process of nature, man’s
knowledge is limited to what he does thus order. Through the intuition of time and space
man gets the stuff of his experience. By the imposition of his categories man supplies the
order in this stuff. Therefore the knowledge that results as the product of this activity of
the mind upon the raw stuff of experience by definition excludes knowledge of God and
of anything that God might do directly in relation to nature. A God who has created and
who by his providence controls nature, and a Christ who as the Son of God redeems
nature, may be believed in if people wish. But they must not say that they know or can
know any such thing. For knowledge is, by definition, limited to the field of science, to
the field of phenomena. The world of religion is the world of the wholly other, of the
wholly unknown and unknowable.
To be sure, Kant does speak of having a practical knowledge of God. But this
practical knowledge is a faith-construct. It is a limiting notion. As men we have no
theoretical, that is, real conceptual knowledge of God. Such real knowledge is, argues
Kant, limited to the space-time world. For that very reason everybody is free to believe
what Ire wishes about that other world. Nobody can interfere with him in that field. All
religious statements are in principle non—cognitive statements.
The point to note now is that Kant does interfere with the Christian’s claim to have
knowledge of God and of his relation to the world. The presupposition of the Christian
view of men and things is that the world is created by the triune God and redeemed by
him. Man is, on this view, nothing like what Kant says he is. Man is, on this view, a
creature made in the image of God. The world is created by God. The order in this world
is there primarily because of the activity of God in relation to it. Thus, as created, every
fact of the world is what it is as a revelation of the activity of the triune God. Man, in the
nature of the case, knows God, the world, and himself, in the very first and in every
succeeding act of his consciousness.
Moreover, as earlier noted, from the beginning God was in communication with man
with respect to his place and duty in the world. Nature was revelational. However, for
nature to be effectively revelational, supernatural thought communication was conjoined
with it from the start. This need for thought communication did not spell a defect in
nature. It only indicated that it was not by itself complete. A hand cannot operate
efficiently except there be an eye.
According to Christianity, mankind remains responsible for the revelation of God as
given to man from the beginning. Nature is, even after the fall, clearly revelational of
God. God’s eternal power and divinity should be seen in nature by all men. The
revelation of God in roan and in the world is objectively clear. As such it is available to
all men. All men are morally bound to react properly to this revelation of God. The fact
that man never could, even before the fall, read nature properly, without supernatural
thought communication, does not reduce man’s responsibility for reacting in the way of
love and obedience to God’s revelation. Fallen man is still responsible for that original
supernatural revelation given in conjunction with God’s revelation in the facts of nature
surrounding man; and in conjunction with God’s revelation in the consciousness of man.
Still further, Paul says that because of man’s original sin the curse of God rests upon
nature. Therefore every man has displayed clearly before him the fact that nature is
created and directed by God and writhing under the curse of God for the sin of man.
Every man, though sinful, has in his own constitution the revelation of God, in the fact
that he is made in the image of God. And every man has in his own constitution the
revelation of the wrath of God for his sin (Rom 5:12 ff.).
7. No Natural Theology
It is of basic importance that what has just been said about God’s revelation in the
world of nature and of man be not confused with what is called natural theology. Natural
theology is the result of the interpretative reaction that sinful man has given to the
revelation of God to him in the created world. When we speak of revelation in nature we
speak of an act of God directed manward. When we speak of natural theology we speak
of a reaction on the part of man directed Godward. This distinction is all important for a
proper exegesis of Romans one.
EvangelicalChapter 7:
Approaches ToScripture
The Defense Of
If then the Christian is to fulfill his calling he must set the Christian approach to men
and things over against that of modern science, philosophy, and theology. If he does not
do so in all three fields he cannot effectively do so in any, one of these fields. We have
seen how the Roman Catholic and the Arminian interpretation of the triune God and his
relation to the word is unable to offer a basic challenge to modern science, modern
philosophy and modern theology. Both Romanists and Arminians ascribe a measure of
autonomy to man. They think of man as, to some extent, metaphysically free. They think
that man does not always and in every sense act within the counsel of God as this counsel
controls whatsoever comes to pass in the world. It goes without saying that on a Roman
Catholic and Arminian foundation, no justice can be done to the idea of Christ speaking
in Scripture as the absolutely authoritative and primary revelation of God to sinful man.
We have earlier seen that Roman Catholicism asserts the infallibility of Scripture but that
it also asserts belief in the infallibility of tradition and of the church in declaring the
meaning of Scripture. Placing tradition and the church on a par with Scripture, in the
nature of the case, cancels out the authority of Scripture in the proper sense of the term.
The Arminian position too, to the extent that it holds to human autonomy, can give only a
formal adherence to the authority of Christ speaking in Scripture.
1. B. B. Warfield
Neither the Roman Catholic nor the Arminian therefore holds to an organic view of
Scripture such as was set forth earlier on the basis of Bavinck and Warfield’s works.
Unfortunately, however, even Warfield himself, after having perhaps done more than
anyone else in modern times to set forth the true view of Scripture, reverts to what is
virtually an Arminian view of its defense.
Warfield says that even though the Bible teaches its own infallible and plenary
inspiration, he does not want to start the truth of Christian teaching and the foundations of
the faith upon the doctrine of plenary inspiration, or upon any doctrine of inspiration
whatever. 1
“These rest,” says Warfield, “upon the previous-fact of revelation.” And, “it is
important to keep ourselves reminded that the supernatural origin and contents of
Christianity, not only may be vindicated apart from any question of inspiration of the
record but, in point of fact, always are vindicated prior to any question as to the
inspiration of their record. We cannot raise the question whether God has given us an
absolutely trustworthy record of the supernatural facts and teachings of Christianity,
before we are assured that there are supernatural facts and teachings to be recorded. The
fact that Christianity is a supernatural religion and the nature of Christianity as a
1
 Op. Cit., p. 121.
supernatural religion, are matters of history; and are independent of any, and every,
theory of inspiration.” 2
We stop here to remark that this appeal to revelation as previous to inspiration is out
of accord with Warfield’s own contention that inspiration is an aspect of revelation.
Warfield, as well as Bavinck has been at pains to interrelate the idea of inspiration with
that of revelation. It is therefore quite impossible to take the organism of revelation apart
and to defend one part of it before the other.
Moreover, according to Warfield himself, we could not know the Christ for what he is
except he himself tell us. It is the Word of Christ, as the Word of God, that lies before us
in Scripture. Says Warfield, “The Biblical writers do not conceive of the Scriptures as a
human product breathed into by the Divine Spirit, and thus heightened in its qualities or
endowed with new qualities; but as a Divine product produced through the
instrumentality of men.” 3 These two points of view, argues Warfield, “look at the
production of Scripture from distinct points of view—the human and the Divine; and the
involved mental attitudes toward the origin of Scripture are very diverse.” 4
Thus the Scripture is a Divine book, created by the divine energy and speaking in its
every part with Divine authority directly to the heart of the readers. This fact is witnessed
by Christ and the sacred writers to whom we owe the New Testament.
If then the whole of Scripture in all its parts and in all its elements, down to the least
minutiae, in form of expression as well as in substance of teaching, is from God, why are
we to start our claim with respect to it by speaking of it as at first blush being merely
words of men? Is it because the doctrine of inspiration, as itself the climax of the
redemptive revelation of God, is now in straits because of modern investigation and
scholarship? This cannot be. Warfield will have none of concessive methods such as
Charles Gore advocated in his day. 5 Warfield refuses to listen to those who would reject
the “whole Reformed doctrine of the Scripture in favor of a more ‘Catholic’ view which
will look upon some of the history recorded in the Bible as only ‘fairly trustworthy’ ... ” 6
A concessionalistic view with respect to the Reformed or organic view of Scripture
results, argues Warfield, in the “proclamation of an indefinite gospel eked out by an
appeal to the Church and a scholastic hierarchy.... ” 7
How can we avoid losing what the Reformation won for the Church of Christ if we
return to a view of Scripture that is similar to Romanism? “What, indeed, would the
church be—what would we, as Christian men, be—without our inspired Bible?” 8 “Let it
suffice to say that to a plenarily inspired Bible, humbly trusted as such, we actually, and
as a matter of fact, owe all that has blessed our lives with hopes of an immortality of
bliss, and with the present fruition of the love of God in Christ.” 9
2
 Idem.
3
 Ibid., p. 153.
4
 Ibid., pp. 153, 154.
5
 Ibid., p. 169.
6
 Ibid., p. 140.
7
 Ibid., p. 171.
8
 Ibid., p. 125.
9
 Ibid., p. 126.
For all this stress upon the plenary inspiration of Scriptures as the work of the Holy
Spirit making the Scriptures the very Word of God, Warfield wants the Christian
apologist to start speaking of them at first as merely the records of men. Says Warfield,
“Inspiration is not the most fundamental of Christian doctrines, nor even the first thing
we prove about the Scriptures. It is the last and crowning fact as to the Scriptures. These
we first prove authentic, historically credible, generally trustworthy, before we prove
them inspired. And the proof of their authenticity ... would give us a firm basis for
Christianity prior to any knowledge on our part of their inspiration, and apart indeed from
the existence of inspiration.” 10
Warfield’s purpose in thus falling back upon the general trustworthiness of the New
Testament as historical records is, as noted, in the interest of convincing the unbeliever of
the revelation and inspiration of God in Christ. The New Testament writers themselves
bear witness to the fact of inspiration. They are the “prime witnesses of the fact and
nature of their inspiration.” But in order to escape the charge that in saying this we are
reasoning in a “vicious circle,” argues Warfield, “We do not assume inspiration in order
to prove inspiration. We do not assume inspiration. We assume only honesty and
sobriety. If a sober and honest writer claims to be inspired by God, then here, at least, is a
phenomenon to be accounted for.” 11
It is a phenomenon, argues Warfield, that criticism cannot account for the New
Testament writers who, being sober and honest men, claim inspiration. How can criticism
disprove their claim? Warfield answers this by saying, “in order, therefore, to shake this
doctrine, biblical criticism must show: either that the New Testament writers do not claim
inspiration; or, that this claim was rejected by the contemporary church; or, that it is
palpably negatived by the fact that the books containing it are forgeries; or, equally
clearly negatived by the fact that they contain along with the claim, errors of fact or
contradictions of statement. The important question before us today, then, is: Has biblical
criticism proved any one of these positions?” 12
The flaw in this whole approach of Warfield’s to the defense of the Bible as the
inspired Word of God is that its philosophy of history is the opposite of that which the
Bible, according to Warfield himself, teaches. If history is not what it is because of its
creation and redemption by the triune God, there could not be any foundation on which
man could stand in order either to affirm or deny the truth about anything. The whole of
Warfield’s conviction with respect to the Bible is to the effect that unless it is the Word
of God there is no light or life for men. On Warfield’s view of the Bible all the
phenomena within and about it are what they are because God and Christ and the Holy
Spirit are what they are and have done what they have done. To be sure, we need not and
must not say, “First the inspired Bible and secondly the divine Christ.” 13 We must rather
take the Bible simultaneously with Christ and with God as its author. It is God who is
speaking through Christ and his Spirit in the Bible. When we have spoken to the
President, we do not take a record of the voice of the President to those who have never
10
 Ibid., p. 210.
11
 Ibid., p. 423.
12
 Ibid., p. 423.
13
 cf. Patton, Op. Cit., p. 146.
heard the voice of the President, in order to have them judge whether it is the voice of the
President!
How could unbelievers, unbelievers just because they have already rejected God’s
revelation in the universe about them and within them by a philosophy of chance and of
human autonomy, ever concede that the claims of the New Testament writers with
respect to their inspiration by God is true? The criterion they employ will compel them to
deny it. It is their criterion that must be shown to involve a metaphysics of chance. Then,
if the Spirit opens their eyes, they will see the truth.
To be sure, if Warfield’s appeal to the natural man were of an ad hominem nature,
then it would be well. Christ does ask the natural man to judge with respect to the truth of
his claims. But then he asks them to admit that their own wisdom has been made
foolishness with God. Only the Christian theory of knowledge, based as it is upon the
absolute authority of the Word of God speaking in Scripture, makes communication of
any sort possible anywhere between men. Without this presupposition men would have
no integrated selves and the world would be a vacuum. Without this presupposition of the
Christian theory of being there would be no defensible position with respect to the
relation of men and things. Neither men nor things would have discernible identity. There
would be no science and no philosophy or theology, for there would be no order. History
would be utterly unintelligible. Finally, without the presupposition of the Christian theory
of morality there would be no intelligible view of the difference between good and evil.
Why should any action be thought to be better than any other except on the supposition
that it is or is not what God approves or disapproves? Except on the Christian basis there
is no intelligible distinction between good and evil.
If Warfield had used this type of apologetic, he would have been able to defend his
high view of Scripture against criticism. If science comes with facts that are supposedly
inconsistent with such a high view, Warfield could ask his critics to show him the
epistemological foundation on which they stand when they raise their objection. Can
they, on their foundation, even have any such thing as an intelligible philosophy of fact?
Why did Warfield allow that those who are in fact drowning next to the ship on which he
is sailing can rightly determine whether the ship is seaworthy? If those who raise
objection to his high view of Scripture speak of contradictions that are found in it, he
should ask them to show him the foundation in reality on which their philosophy of logic
rests. If they answer that logic is logic and has nothing to do with reality, he can ignore
what they say. If they say that the law of contradiction is not merely a formal law but
determines what is possible or impossible in reality, he can show that only the truth of
Christianity furnishes a foundation for the laws of logic. On any non-Christian basis,
logic, to be effective in relation to reality, must reduce this reality to blank identity. The
philosophy of Parmenides illustrates this fact. Logic that does not rest upon the
presupposition of the creation of the laws of reality in general and of human thought in
particular is a pure form without content. To talk about the law of contradiction without
asking with respect to the metaphysical foundation upon which it rests is to talk in the air.
We cease our discussion of Warfield’s view at this point. Its importance for us today
lies in the fact that it has been the starting point for the approach to Scripture by many of
its defenders today. Yet it is out of accord with the view of Scripture entertained by
Warfield himself.
2. Gordon H. Clark
Dr. Gordon H. Clark is a firm believer in and a valiant defender of the theology of the
Calvinistic Reformation and, more particularly, of the Westminster Confession and
Catechisms. For him truth is true and the good is good because God says that they are.
One would think then that Clark would have an organic view of the Scripture and its
inspiration such as Warfield and Bavinck have. But this is not the case. Instead of
integrating God’s general revelation in the created world with his supernatural revelation
given by thought and word communication, Clark sets these over against one another.
That this is the case is apparent from his discussion of the “inadequacy of general
revelation.” Reformed theologians have, of course, spoken of the inadequacy of general
revelation. By this they meant first that it is inadequate for men as sinners. Sinners need
God’s revelation of grace in Christ and only Christ himself reveals his work of grace in
Scripture. By this they meant, secondly, that general revelation was inadequate even for
men as creatures. God therefore spoke to Adam directly even before the Fall, to instruct
him with respect to the use he should make of the facts of the created world. Man never
knew anything without the interaction of fact and word revelation upon him. His self-
awareness is unintelligible without this interaction. But both of these points with respect
to the inadequacy of general revelation do not, for Reformed theologians such as Bavinck
and Warfield, indicate any lack of clarity in this revelation. Quite the contrary. These
theologians follow Calvin as Calvin follows Paul when he asserts that “the invisible
things of him since the creation of the world are clearly seen, being perceived through the
things that are made, even his everlasting power and divinity” (Rom 1:20).
Reflecting this teaching of the apostle Paul, Calvin says: “His essence, indeed, is
incomprehensible, utterly transcending all human thought; but on each of his works his
glory is engraven in characters so bright, so distinct, and so illustrious, that none,
however dull and illiterate, can plead ignorance as their excuse.” 14
Men ought to see that God is the creator of the world. God did not leave himself
without a witness in that he gave them “from heaven rain and fruitful seasons” (Acts
14:17).
Men ought to see that God displays his character in the created world even in malam
partem. “For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men who hold down the truth in unrighteousness” (Rom 1:18). God
cursed the ground because of the sin of man. Paul says that the whole creation “groaneth
and travaileth in pain together until now.” Because of man’s sin creation is “under the
bondage of corruption” (Rom 8:21–22). Men ought to see this too. It is clearly there to be
seen. As time went on, after the fall of Adam, and sinful men became exceeding sinful,
God revealed his wrath all the more by giving them up “unto vile passions” (Rom 1:26).
Men ought to read God’s general revelation in the light of the supernatural revelation
originally given to Adam as their representative. General revelation from the beginning,
says Paul, was meant to be read in the light of God’s word-communication to man. The
fact that originally general revelation needed supernatural revelation does not mean that it
lacked clarity. To do their work effectively your hands and feet need eyes to direct them
and these eyes, in turn, need the light of day to do their work. But the need of light does
14
 Institutes, Bk. 1, Ch. 5.1.
not spell any inherent defect in the eyes as the need of eyes does not spell any inherent
defect in hands and feet.
The whole teaching of Paul and of Calvin as well as of later Reformed theologians,
following Paul, is to the effect that all men, since the fall, ought to see the world as it
really is. The world, and therefore every fact in it, is actually created by God and directed
by his redemptive providence. All the world, and therefore every fact in it, is actually
under the curse of God because of the sin of man. Man was never expected to read his
mandate with respect to his created environment from this environment as such. Man was
never alone with natural or general revelation by itself. We cannot see the earth
producing its abundance apart from the heat and the light of the sun. But this fact does
not detract from the capacity of the earth to show its ability to do this thing. So with
respect to God’s general revelation. Man ought to see that it can and does function both
in bonam and in malam partem because of God’s supernatural thought communication to
man with respect to it.
Now Clark’s position with respect to Scripture and the defense of its teaching is
defective because he does not thus integrate general revelation with special revelation.
Clark does, indeed, relate original pre-redemptive supernatural revelation to general
revelation. But he fails to relate them in an organic, supplemental fashion.
“When Adam was created and placed in the Garden of Eden,” says Clark, “he did not
know what to do. Nor would a study of the Garden have led to any necessary conclusion.
His duty was imposed on him by a special divine revelation. Thus moral norms,
commands and prohibitions were established by a special and not a general revelation.” 15
It is thus that Clark destroys the organic, supplemental view of the relation of special
to general revelation. Here is Adam, as first created. He does not know what to do. He
looks about him. Adam does not see nature as God’s revelation to him. He looks within.
Though he is the image-bearer of God, Adam does not see himself as such. He does not
know what to do with respect to himself any more than with respect to the world about
him.
This entire approach of Clark’s overlooks the fact that from the beginning God spoke
to man. There never was a second of time when Adam did not know what to do. There
never was a time when he was confronted with the created universe by itself. It is true
that if Adam had, at any time, been left to react to God’s revelation in nature and to his
own constitution without the benefit of supernatural thought and word communication, he
would not have known what to do. But such a condition never did exist. God’s revelation
through man’s own constitution must therefore be said to speak of God’s attributes to
man, in conjunction with supernatural revelation. This was true from the beginning.
It is only if we thus maintain the original organic relation of natural to supernatural
revelation that we can maintain Paul’s teaching with respect to natural revelation after the
Fall. Paul says that nature and human nature do manifest the presence of God. To be sure,
nature and human nature do not manifest the grace of God. To be sure, nature and human
nature were never meant by themselves to be a sufficient revelation of God to man. For
all that, nature and human nature have always been clearly manifestory of God’s
15
 “Special Divine Revelation as Rational” in Revelation and the Bible, ed. Carl F. H.
Henry, p. 29.
presence. It has been sufficient and clear when seen in relation to supernatural revelation,
and it was, from the beginning, meant to be seen in this connection.
It is this view of nature and of human nature that is the necessary presupposition of
redemptive-supernatural revelation as given in Scripture. The whole of supernatural
redemptive revelation is given in conjunction with the revelation of God in nature and in
human nature. Supernatural redemptive revelation is integrated with God’s revelation in
nature and in human nature. Supernatural revelation is not seen for what it is unless it is
seen as thus integrated with revelation in the created universe.
It is impossible to follow Paul’s teaching with respect to the guilt of sinners in respect
to the revelation of God in the universe unless one begins his whole approach to the
question of revelation by thinking of natural and supernatural revelation as thus
organically related. Paul holds the sinner responsible for not seeing the presence of God’s
attributes in nature and in himself. But Paul does this because he thinks of man as
inherently a covenantal being. The sinner is a covenant breaker in and with Adam. Every
fact that faces man, through his own constitution as well as through his environment, puts
him face to face with God. He is therefore to handle every fact with which he deals to the
glory of God. As a scientist he is to use such hypotheses and such only as are based upon
the presupposition that every fact is what it is because of the place that it occupies in the
plan of God. His scientific method is truly scientific and truly productive of the purpose
for which it is robe used only if it is used on the presupposition that man knows nature
properly now, and always knew nature properly, only in conjunction with God’s speech
to him about it. Originally man’s very self-awareness required the organically
revelational environment that comes from the interaction of word and fact revelation.
After the fail, supernatural redemptive revelation must supply what the original word-
revelation supplied to Adam.
Precisely here we discover the difference between the Reformed and the Roman
Catholic-Arminian view of revelation in general. On the Reformed view, all created
reality is covenantally revelational. The facts of man’s created environment are what they
are as the field of operation for the covenantal reaction of man to God. Man, made in the
image of God, is either covenantally obedient or covenantally disobedient in all of his
reactions to all of the facts of God’s revelational material. The sinner is holding down the
truth in unrighteousness when, in his “scientific method,” he assumes the pure non-
relatedness of the facts with which he deals and when he applies hypotheses that assume
that the facts could possibly be anything other than revelational of God.
God’s revelation which appears to all men in all the facts which they face is creative-
redemptive. It is the triune God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit who is covenantally
operative in all of the facts of the world. If man does not recognize this creative-
redemptive character of all the facts of the universe, he resists the truth in
unrighteousness. If man does not see that all the facts are what they are in relation to one
another because of the creative-redemptive program of the triune God through them, he
abides under the wrath of God.
The Roman Catholic holds to no such view. Because of its use of Aristotelian or
Greek methodology, Roman Catholicism does not think of man’s self-awareness as
covenantal and of “nature” as, from the beginning, revealing God, in conjunction with
God’s word-revelation in paradise. The facts of nature are not then seen to be what they
are as revelational of God.
It is also of the essence of the modern approach to the field of science that the facts
are assumed to be non-revelational of God in the sense discussed. It is therefore the
responsibility of Christians who are scientists to call other men who are also scientists, to
repentance for their assumption of neutrality with respect to the facts with which they
deal in the laboratory. The non-believing scientist is actively engaged in breaking God’s
covenant requirements when he says that he is simply following the facts wheresoever
they may lead him. This is as though someone would dig up a piece of ground on the
White House lawn and then not only act greatly surprised when the guard taps him on the
shoulder and asks him for his permit to do what he is doing, but insist on his right to do
what he is doing without any permit at all. If I find a red heifer with the letters LBJ on it,
on the LBJ ranch in Texas, I will grant that I need a permit to move it about. If I enter
through the gate of the ranch at all, I already know that every fact I will meet within the
confines of the ranch belongs to LBJ.
Now Clark, frankly and outspokenly committed to the Reformed faith though he is,
fails to thus challenge the unbeliever to show his permit. He does not tell the unbelieving
scientist that nature clearly reveals the ownership of God the creator-redeemer. Clark
simply gives up asking the natural man to recognize the revelational character of the field
of facts in which he makes his research. Clark says simply that science “must not be
regarded as cognitive.” 16
Clark thinks that by thus speaking of science as non-cognitive he at least makes room
for the Christian religion. But then he makes room for religion in the way that the White
House guard might make room for LBJ by asking the intruder mentioned above to restrict
his activity to a certain small corner of the rose garden. Graciously accepting this
arrangement, the illegitimate ground-digger soon digs tunnels underneath the White
House itself, its collapse being the inevitable issue. After all, if the ground-digger claims
to have the right to dig at one point on the White House lawn, he will at last claim the
right to dig wherever he pleases, He will not only claim the right to dig wherever he
pleases, but he will claim that he simply must dig up the whole ground to accomplish his
purpose. After all, he wants to replace the White House with a building of his own.
Having granted this sort of thing, Clark is driven to the position of having to beg for
permission to have a place alongside the ground-digger’s present operations for his own
religious structure of Calvinism. He thinks he is very bold in claiming the right to build
his Calvinistic structure alongside that of the anti-Christian ground-digger. He argues
vigorously against those who claim that “all truth is to be obtained by one method, the
method of science.” 17
And this is precisely what the modern neo-Protestant does when in the name of Kant,
he claims room for faith as a necessary supplement to an autonomous science. Clark
certainly does not want thus to beg for mercy and for permission to add his Calvinism to
modern phenomenalist science. Yet he cannot, without retracing his steps, escape falling
into the trap of the ethical dualism of modern religious thought.
16
 The Philosophy Of Science And Belief In God, Nutley, 1964, p. 93.
17
 Op. Cit., p. 29.
A. Can I Trust My Bible?
We ask now what implication Clark’s view of the non-cognitive character of science
has on his way of defending the Bible and what the Bible teaches about the triune God
and his relation to the world.
“How May I Know the Bible Is Inspired?” is the title of a chapter Clark contributes to
a Symposium under the title, Can I Trust My Bible? In line with Warfield’s approach,
Clark wants first to establish the question of the truth of the Bible before he discusses its
inspiration. This in itself commits him, as it did Warfield, to a Roman Catholic-Arminian
type of apologetics. It commits him to the idea that the natural man can quite correctly
interpret nature and the nature of man up to a certain point in terms of his own principles.
It commits him to holding some such position as Butler held when he said that the deists
and he had in common their interpretation of the course and constitution of nature. The
only difference there is between him and the deists, argues Butler, pertains to that which
is beyond nature.
Now Clark shares the operational view of nature with the non-Christian scientist.
Butler still claimed to be able to prove the possibility and probable truth of the Christian
teaching with respect to Christ and his relation to nature. But Clark cannot rightfully
claim anything in the way of superiority of the Christian teachings with respect to nature
over other views. If science is non-cognitive, that is the end of all argument. For that is to
say that nature does not clearly reveal the power and divinity of God.
Yet Clark claims that the truth of Christianity can, at least to some extent, be
established by an appeal to the facts of nature. Says Clark: “Some of the evidence that the
Bible is true is presented in other chapters of this book. Archaeological and historical
research has corroborated Biblical history in numerous instances. This material will here
be assumed.” 18
Clark himself deals with the “logical support” for the claim that the Bible is true. 19
The “attempt to show the Bible’s logical consistency is,” says Clark, “I believe, the best
method of defending inspiration.” 20 “Is there then,” he adds, “any proposition which the
believer and the unbeliever will both accept without proof?” 21 “In times past,” Clark
continues, “there have been areas of agreement. Non Christians would admit that God
exists. During the Reformation the truthfulness of the Scripture was so widely taken for
granted that the evidences seemed to furnish conclusive proof to any normal mind. But
this situation no longer exists. Not only do most people reject the truthfulness of the
Bible, but many reject also the belief in God.” 22
As the situation is now, “the doctrine of inspiration, like every other Christian
doctrine, cannot be demonstrated to the satisfaction of clear thinking unbeliever.” 23
aHowever, we can, as believers, show that the Bible “is logically consistent.” The
unbeliever must needs regard this fact to be a “most remarkable accident.” “It seems
18
 Can I Trust My Bible? Chicago, 1963, p. 9.
19
 Ibid., p. 10.
20
 Ibid., p. 23.
21
 Ibid., p. 23.
22
 Ibid., pp. 23, 24.
23
 Ibid., p. 24.
more likely that a single, superintending mind could produce this result than that it just
happened accidentally. Logical consistency therefore is evidence for inspiration; but it is
not demonstration. Strange accidents do indeed occur, and no proof is forthcoming that
the Bible is not such an accident, unlikely perhaps, but still possible.” 24
The following points must be noted with respect to this argument. We must (a)
remember that, according to Clark, the unbeliever does justice to nature if he says that its
laws are merely operational and not revelatory of God’s attributes at all. This excludes
the possibility of making any claim even for the more probable truthfulness for the claim
that nature is the work of God’s creative-redemptive act than for the view that it has come
into existence by chance.
Then (b) Clark asserts that non-believers have sometimes agreed with believers in
saying that God exists. But this is only formally true. The content of the word God, the
meaning of the word God always differs radically between the Christian and the non-
Christian. The same holds for the idea that unbelievers have sometimes held to the
“truthfulness of the Scripture.” When Clark agrees with the unbeliever on the merely
operational view of nature, he virtually asserts that the unbeliever and the believer may
still believe in the same God. But then this time the unbeliever is ahead in the game. He
has maneuvered Clark into a virtual admission that the triune God is not clearly operative
in the space-time world. How can Clark, in view of all this, consistently assert that the
Bible is “logically consistent” in what it teaches? Does the Bible teach what Clark, the
Calvinist, believes, namely, that God controls whatsoever comes to pass, and at the same
time teach that the Bible, teaching this very fact, might have appeared in the world as an
accident?
“To deny that God exists is as much a self-contradiction,” says Clark, “as to deny the
geometrical theorem.” 25 Then with respect to the general content of biblical teaching,
Clark adds, “if the Biblical doctrines are self-consistent, they have met the only
legitimate test of reason. This test of logic is precisely the requirement that a set of
propositions be meaningful, whether spoken by God or man. And if propositions have no
meaning, obviously they reveal nothing.” 26 “Logical consistency” is not an “external test
of Scripture.” It is, rather, “exemplified in the Scripture; and thus the Scripture can be a
meaningful revelation to the rational mind of man.” 27 So then, it is “the rational mind of
man,” i.e., the rational mind of the unbeliever who determines what propositions made by
God in Christ, have meaning. If God wants to convey meaning to man, he must speak
according to the requirements of the law of contradiction as the natural man conceives of
this law. And the natural man conceives of this law as operating in a non-created, or
chance-controlled universe. The natural man today may follow Aristotle’s example and
think of logical law as somehow, quite incomprehensibly, operative in a universe of
chance. The natural man today may follow Kant, and assert that the laws of thought
constitute the a priori equipment of the mind of man, with which equipment he
24
 Ibid., p. 24.
25
 “Special Divine Revelation as Rational,” article in Revelation and the Bible, 1958, p.
33.
26
 Ibid., p. 37.
27
 Ibid., p. 39.
constructs order in the purely contingent material that surrounds him. In any case it is the
natural man who is virtually granted the right to settle what God can or cannot do.
In any case the natural man thinks of the laws of logic as constituting abstract
principles which are operative in correlative relation to the pure, brute factual stuff of
experience.
As a Christian thinker, Clark holds that the laws of logic are the equipment of man as
made in the image of God. If Clark carried out his Christian conviction consistently he
would contend that the law of contradiction can operate properly only in a universe that is
what it is because of the plan of God with respect to it. In that case he would not say that
the Bible and what it teaches could possibly have appeared as an accident. In that case he
would rather have argued that the law of contradiction cannot function in a universe of
chance. Then he would have said that the Bible and what it teaches must be presupposed
as being what it claims to be, the inspired Word of God, or else there is no significant
predication in science, in philosophy or in theology. Then he would not have said that the
planets above and the plants below show some of the wisdom and power of God only “to
those who already believe that God has created them.” 28 He would then rather have said,
with Calvin, following Paul, that all men ought to see God in nature since he is clearly
revealed there, but that only he who is given the regenerated heart actually does see this
to be the case.
3. Dewey M. Beegle
We turn now to the book of Dewey M. Beegle, The Inspiration of Scripture
(Philadelphia—no date).
Beegle’s book deals directly with the “inspiration” of Scripture, but his discussion of
the inspiration of Scripture involves him, as any such discussion must, in a view of God,
of man and of the world.
A. The Inductive Method
“It is generally acknowledged that the findings and convictions of the past” says
Beegle, “valid as they may have been, cannot be the answer for this generation unless
they can withstand reexamination in the light of the new information gained during the
last forty years or so. The purpose of this book is to make such a reexamination.” 29
In examining the “new information” of which Beegle speaks, “the most crucial factor
is that of method.” 30 What method shall we follow as we examine “all the relevant data
both of Biblical and non-Biblical.” 31 Well there are only two main methods available to
us. “The human mind is capable of two basic processes of reasoning. One of these is the
deductive method. It starts with an assumption or generalization from which are deduced
details or particulars. The other approach is the inductive method. It begins with facts or
28
 Revelation and the Bible, p. 28.
29
 Ibid., p. 11.
30
 Ibid., p. 11.
31
 Ibid., p. 9.
details from which a generalization or principle is formulated.” 32 And “if handled
properly ... the two methods are complementary.” 33 Even so priority must be given to
the inductive method. “The history of archaeological activity makes this quite evident.” 34
“Order came out of chaos when priority was given to inductive reasoning, and the same
can be said for other realms of science.” 35
How can we apply the inductive method to the question of Scripture? Well in the past
Christians thought this was not possible. “In the twentieth century, however, the church
has become increasingly aware of the fact that God is the author of all truth and,
accordingly, that the priority of induction is equally valid in the study of Scripture.” 36
When Beegle speaks of the “priority of induction” he means that “induction is the
first method of reasoning to be employed in the interpretation of the Bible.” 37 And this
implies, he says, “the prior act of faith and commitment to God and his revelation.” 38
“Aside from the ultimate authority of the triune God, Scripture is our highest authority
and to it we must defer in our search for God’s revelation and will for us. By the
inductive method, then, we mean a reverent approach to Scripture that resolves at all
costs to let God’s Word speak for itself.” 39
And how is God’s word to speak for itself? We listen to the biblical writers and
“regard their statements as primary data for our consideration.” 40 “Every claim that they
make for their inspiration is a relevant fact and so is every statement concerning the topic
of inspiration.” 41
But if we are to apply the method of induction we must also “reckon with the facts
(sometimes referred to as ‘phenomena’) of the Biblical record.” 42 This leads us further to
see that we must correlate “historical details noted in Scripture with the non-Biblical
data.... A truly Biblical formulation of inspiration must give equal weight to the teaching
and to the facts of Scripture.” 43
It is only if we thus deal with the “whole body of Biblical data” and relate these to
non-Biblical data that we can avoid onesidedness. 44 We have an extreme instance of
onesidedness when men reason as follows: “God is perfect. God has revealed himself in
the autographs, therefore the autographs have to be inerrant.” “A closely related reason or
this doctrine was to guarantee the value and the authority of extant Bibles. According to
this argument, without the presupposition of a perfect original text one could just as well
32
 Ibid., p. 11.
33
 Ibid., p. 12.
34
 Ibid., p. 12.
35
 Ibid., pp. 12,36
 Ibid., p. 13.
37
 Ibid., p. 13.
Idem.
39
 Idem.
40
 Ibid., p. 14.
41
 Idem.
42
 Idem.
43
 Ibid., p. 14.
44
 Idem.
13.
turn to Buddhist or Hindu literature. 45 In brief, even though our Bibles are an
approximation of the original manuscripts, their value and authority are ensured, so it is
claimed, by the assumption of inerrant autographs.” 46
But surely, argues Beegle, it is pointless to make any “abstract reference to the
autographs.” 47 “in proclaiming and defending the ‘good news’ Jesus and the apostles
took as their authority the available manuscripts of the Old Testament books. Their
Jewish opponents shared this belief, and so the spiritual battle was waged and won on the
common ground of the extant copies of Scripture, not on an abstract reference to the
autographs.” 48
To sum up the main points of Beegle’s argument then we note the following:
a. Beegle says that he “frankly acknowledges belief in the inspiration and authority of
Scripture.” 49
b. Jesus, says Beegle, did not make an “abstract appeal” to non-extant autographs. On
the contrary Jesus based his appeal on the extant manuscripts of Scripture. It did not
trouble him in the least that these manuscripts had errors in them. “The inductive
evidence of the New Testament indicates that Jesus taught a strong doctrine of inspiration
and authority of Scripture, yet without claiming inerrancy. Once this is recognized, there
is no need to discredit Jesus by considering him either a fanatic or a liar.” 50
c. Whenever the Bible speaks of its inspiration we are to take such statements as data
for our consideration. More than that we are to take them as primary data. But this does
not mean that we must subject ourselves to such statements as finally authoritative. We
are not to interpret the “phenomena” of Scripture in the light of such statements as
spoken by God. On the contrary we must also reckon with these phenomena of the
biblical record. As we look at the two kinds of biblical data, it is up to us to determine
what inspiration can mean. It must mean something that is consistent with the errors that
we find in the Bible, as it is available to us.
d. Included in our consideration of the phenomena of Scripture is their correlation
with “non-Biblical data.” 51
e. It is only if we thus follow the inductive method that we can escape reasoning in a
circle. 52
f. Surely “ ... one cannot rule out a legitimate use of human reason aided by the Holy
Spirit on the grounds that unaided reason leads to serious error and eventually considers
the gospel as foolishness.” 53
g. Reason does not need to appeal to the Holy Spirit for help in order to undertake its
proper function in relation to the data of Scripture and their correlation with non-biblical
45
 The reference is the present writer’s “Introduction” to B. B. Warfield’s The Inspiration
and Authority of the Bible, p. 46, note 22.
46
 Ibid., p. 23.
47
 Ibid., p. 22.
48
 Ibid., p. 22.
49
 Ibid., p. 13.
50
 Ibid., p. 170.
51
 Ibid., p. 24.
52
 Ibid., p. 63.
53
 Ibid., p. 63.
facts. Objectivity is guaranteed by the fact that “the human mind does not create the
evidence which is determinative in the separation of truth from error. All human reason
can do is to function properly with the data that are furnished it. Every human being has
the power and the right to observe the data. The factor of truth or error is settled before
human reason comes on the scene. While reason can function correctly with the evidence
and ascertain the true and the false, it is also possible for it to work improperly and to
come to inaccurate evaluation of the data. In neither case, however, is human reason the
real arbiter of truth or error.” 54
h. It is thus by the inductive method that we can determine “how far human reason
and logic can go in solving the problem of inspiration.” 55
(1) Having escaped the bonds of deductive reasoning we discover that “the Bible does
not teach that unless a thing is totally true it cannot be inspired.” 56
(2) Having escaped the bonds of deductive reasoning we are free to observe the fact
that not all the writers of Scripture “saw eye to eye” in all the doctrinal details related to
eschatology. 57
(3) And “this apparent diversity of doctrinal data is also evident in other areas of
theology, for example, the atonement. There are many views, but none of them
incorporates all the Biblical evidence in its systematic formulation. The clear meaning of
some passages does not fit in with the clear meaning of others.” 58
i. It is thus by following the inductive method that we, together with Jesus, can have a
strong doctrine of inspiration and authority of Scripture, “yet without claiming
inerrancy.” The fact that the clear meaning of some passages dealing with the atonement
does not fit in with the clear meaning of others does not mean that “the Biblical writers
are not trustworthy guides in the area of doctrine.” 59 Beegle agrees with Francis Landey
Patton that the “real question is whether the Bible is true, not whether it is inspired.” 60
With Patton he refuses to “make the in terrorem argument that unless you believe in the
inerrancy of the Bible, you have no right to believe in Christ.” 61
j. Our concern with the truth of the Bible refers to what it says with respect to faith
and practice. And “all of Scripture does not pertain to faith and practice.” 62
What the Bible says about faith and practice it says in human language. Human
language “cannot completely express or contain all the factors in human personality.
How much less can it do so with the wider scope of divine personality.” 63 Therefore
though “the Biblical writers shared unequivocally some doctrines that cluster around
Jesus, the incarnate Christ, and the way of salvation,” 64 this common sharing of meaning
54
 Ibid., p. 64.
55
 Ibid., p. 67.
56
 Ibid., p. 67.
57
 Ibid., p. 172.
58
 Ibid., p. 173.
59
 Idem.
60
 Ibid., p. 66.
61
 Ibid., p. 66.
62
 Ibid., p. 24.
63
 Ibid., p. 174.
64
 Ibid., p. 174.
cannot be clearly expressed in language. But this does not in the least interfere with our
sensing of truth in what together they say.
k. Our inductive method helps us to perform a great ecumenical service in our day. It
enables us to see that the difference between traditional and current neo-orthodox
theology “is really one of semantics.” Traditional conservative Christianity endeavors to
protect Scripture by equating revelation and doctrine. It contends that “revelation is a
series of eternal, timeless truths set in propositional form.” 65 On the other hand the basic
assertion of contemporary theologians is that “eternal or propositional truths, like
doctrine, cannot be considered revelation because they cannot save.” 66 We can avoid the
extremes of either position if we point out that “a minimal core of doctrine is basic to
genuine faith.” 67 “God’s ultimate purpose is that all men should enter the realm where
grace, love, and truth become subjective realities.” 68 To be assured of this we need the
minimal of propositional truth mentioned above. “Scripture states, in clear propositional
form, ‘God is love\rquote ... \rdblquote 69 It is in the interest of this universal love of
God that Paul makes bold to say that Christ rose from the dead and that our faith is futile
unless we believe this resurrection. 70
We must therefore “steer a middle course between two extremes.” 71 We do not, with
the extremely orthodox, maintain the need of believing in the inerrancy of Scripture. We
do not maintain with the extremely neo-orthodox theologians that we can maintain a
“genuine faith in Christ while doubting the truth and relevance of much that Scripture
declares.” 72 It is no accident that among the extremists who hold to the necessity of
believing inerrancy there are some so bold as to say that: “It is only the followers of
Calvin who have a theology that fully fits in with this idea of Scripture. Could it be that
their doctrine of inspiration derives from this theology which is read back into
Scripture?” 73 74
B. A New View Of The Sovereignty Of God
The points enumerated above all direct our attention to the fact that the reason Beegle
does not believe in the inerrancy of Scripture springs from a philosophy of man and the
world that does not allow for the sovereignty of God as taught in the Reformed
Confessions. Beegle has not ventured on an inductive study of Scripture with respect to
its teachings on God and his relation to man. He might at least have taken a couple of
pages (of the many that he devoted to his expression of a large measure of agreement
65
 Ibid., p. 148.
66
 Idem.
67
 Ibid., p. 151.
68
 Ibid., p. 152.
69
 Ibid., p. 150.
70
 Ibid., p. 154.
71
 Ibid., p. 164.
72
 Ibid., p. 164.
73
 Ibid., p. 165.
74
 The last reference is to the present writer’s “Introduction” to Warfield’s work
mentioned earlier.
with the neo-orthodox view of the sovereignty of God rather than with a view such as is
presented, e.g., by Charles Hodge in his Systematic Theology), in order to discover
whether such a view is found in Scripture as the latter advocates. It is a foregone
conclusion with Beegle that Scripture cannot teach any such view.
The inductive method as employed by Beegle is, unlike the inductive method of
Hodge, based on the assumption that man is, at least to some extent, independent of God.
Beegle is quite right in asserting that there is a “high correlation” between the
Calvinistic doctrine of the sovereignty of God and the idea of inerrancy. Beegle speaks of
the Calvinist or Reformed doctrine of God as being determinist. 75 He does not reject the
Reformed doctrine of God because he has inductively shown it to be unscriptural. He
rejects it because he cannot logically penetrate the relation of the self-sufficient God who
speaks in Scripture and human responsibility. One wonders what Beegle would do with
the words of the apostle Peter when he says that the crucifixion of Christ happened by the
determinate counsel of God and was, at the same time, performed by the wicked hands of
sinful men (Acts 2:23). Beegle cannot do justice to the abundance of evidence in
Scripture for the fact that man’s responsibility is always placed within the realm of God’s
all comprehending and overruling providence.
Beegle’s inductive method is therefore based on the assumption that man does not act
finally within the providential control and direction of God but operates in a vacuum.
In addition Beegle has not ventured upon an actually inductive analysis of the
teaching of Scripture with respect to the question of sin and its influence on the human
mind. He has not even given a second look at the assertions of Scripture that the natural
man receives not the things of God because they are discerned only by the enlightening
of the Holy Spirit. Jesus said that no one can come to him except the Father draw him.
Jesus said that the Father quickeneth whom he will and that he has given power to the
Son to quicken whom he will. Jesus says that we must be born again to see the kingdom
of God. Jesus says that men would not come to him because their deeds were evil. Paul
said that we are by our sinful nature dead in trespasses and sins. He says that we are by
nature at enmity against God and do not want to see the truth about ourselves and our
need of redemption.
Beegle ignores all this and many more biblical data and simply starts from the
assumption that all men, whether born again or not, are ready to follow the truth so soon
as it is presented to them. Beegle argues that the whole question of the blinding and
hardening effect of sin upon the person of man, and therefore upon the use that the sinner
makes of his intellect or reason, is quite irrelevant to the question as to where the
criterion of truth is to be found. He asserts that “the fact of truth or error is settled before
human reason comes upon the scene.” 76 Therefore there is no need to fear that the use of
the inductive method should lead to subjectivism.
For Beegle, objectivity is found in the facts as they exist, whether or not God controls
them. After all, says Beegle, the human mind does not create the evidence. All that
“human reason can do is to function properly with the data that are furnished it.” 77 But
then for Beegle the same thing is true for God, who has created the facts of the world.
75
 Ibid., p. 167.
76
 Ibid., p. 64.
77
 Ibid., p. 64.
According to Beegle man must not identify objectivity with anything that God says in the
Bible. Man must not, at any point, identify “God says” with “the Bible says.” If the Bible
is to be spoken of as the Word of God this means, for Beegle, that in it we have the
opinion of God. So far as the “Biblical writers” expressed themselves on the matter of
inspiration, their statements are merely data for consideration. Every claim the Bible
writers make for “their inspiration is a relevant fact and so is every statement concerning
the topic of inspiration.” 78 To be sure, Beegle adds that statements made by Biblical
writers must be taken as primary data. But whatever Beegle may mean when he says that
the statement of Scripture with respect to inspiration are primary data, this much is clear:
in merely regarding these statements as data which must be correlated with other data,
man, to all intents and purposes, becomes the arbiter of truth and error. In spite of what
Beegle says about man finding objectivity rather than making it, his view makes man the
final arbiter of truth.
C. The Philosophy Of Methodology
That such is the case may be readily seen from the following considerations:
(1) Nobody Knows
On such a view as Beegle offers nobody knows objectivity, nobody knows truth.
Beegle starts with the idea of abstract truth in order to escape circular reasoning. The only
way to escape the process of circular reasoning with respect to the authority of Jesus and
the Scriptures, argues Beegle, “is to employ our reason objectively with respect to all the
evidence, Biblical or otherwise.” 79 Of course, says Beegle, even when we employ reason
objectively with respect to all the evidence we cannot attain “perfect objectivity.” For “in
spite of our sincere efforts we bring to the task of interpretation certain unconscious
presuppositions that have become a part of us during our formative years.” 80 What these
unconscious presuppositions are Beegle does not say. Certainly they are for him not due
to original sin. Beegle has no room for the idea of original sin as understood by Luther or
Calvin in his scheme of things.
Having made his concession with respect to the restricting influence of unconscious
presuppositions on the interpretative activity of the human mind, Beegle goes on to say
that “we are nonetheless dependent on reason; for we must use it to help isolate and set
aside, as far as possible, even our restricting assumptions.” 81
We note now that all of this sorting activity of reason is supposed to pertain to an
activity of reason which, as noted, has no effect on the question of objectivity at all for, as
noted, “the factor of truth and error is settled before human reason comes on the scene.”
82
 And yet reason must sift and sort in order to find objectivity.
78
 Ibid., p. 14.
79
 Ibid., p. 63.
80
 Ibid., p. 63.
81
 Idem.
82
 Ibid., p. 64.
But let us forget Beegle’s appeal to an “objective” truth of which nobody knows. A
truth that is settled before man meets it, and a truth that is settled before God meets it, is a
truth that nobody is able to know. It is a noise in the woods where nobody is present to
hear.
Yet we cannot forget this unless we are to stop speaking with Beegle at all. His whole
inductive method presupposes such a view of truth. His inductive method is definitely not
the inductive method used by such men as Hodge when, presupposing the authority of
Scripture as the Word of God, he seeks to compare all the data of revelation in order to
ascertain what God the Creator-Redeemer has to say to man. Beegle’s method is
avowedly the same as that which modern men in general, whether Christian or not, may
and do use for the interpretation of themselves in relation to their environment. This
modern inductive method presupposes that facts are not created by God and are not
directed by the providential and saving acts of God in Christ.
To be sure, Beegle speaks of “committed Christians” who make a “legitimate use of
reason” and are aided by the “Holy Spirit” in doing so. 83 And the inductive procedure of
those who are thus led by the Holy Spirit is not, he assures us, to be compared with the
idea of underlining and coloring certain passages of Scripture with one color and other
passages of Scripture with another color in order to distinguish between what is
acceptable and what is not acceptable to them. 84
We can agree at this point with Beegle when he says that his method does not
distinguish between the acceptable and the unacceptable. On the inductive method used
by Beegle nothing that God says is acceptable. God cannot be beforehand with man in
interpreting any fact because he, as well as man, must discover truth already existent
before he meets it. Beegle’s handling of the Scriptures according to his inductive method
allows for no acceptance of any passage of Scripture as normative in any sense. On his
basis, no man need even trouble to underscore the biblical data with one color and non-
biblical data with another color. For all practical purposes he may as well drop his
assertion to the effect that statements by biblical writers on any subject are to be used by
reason as primary data. On his view, nobody knows truth.
(2) But You Are Wrong And I Am Right
As a matter of fact, of course, the one who asserts that nobody knows truth is thereby
virtually asserting that he who claims to know the truth is wrong in thinking so. To say
that statements by biblical writers are simply to be taken as data along with other data is
to assume that he who makes such a statement knows that such biblical statements cannot
be statements made by a God who controls and knows all things. The inductive method
used by Beegle implies not only an open universe in which all minds, divine and human,
are surrounded by impenetrable mystery but also at the same time, a universe in which
the human mind knows that the divine mind must work under the same limitations as
does the human mind. And in order to make such a statement the human mind must be
beforehand with the divine mind in the claim as to what can and what cannot be known
by any mind.
83
 Ibid., p. 63.
84
 Ibid., p. 63.
Suppose that a Christian believer and a non-Christian together use the inductive
method such as Beegle employs: then the non-Christian in effect says to the Christian:
Let us be open-minded. This means that we must start with the idea that nobody knows
anything about truth as absolute truth. If we are to have a joint and impartial investigation
as to whether the statements made by the writers of your Bible are in effect statements
made by your God or the Son of your God (and thus the truth in the light of which all
other claims to truth are to be judged), we must regard these statements as data available
to reason as it seeks for objectivity. You have your hypothesis with respect to these data,
and I allow that it may eventually prove to be the truth about them. And you will of
course allow that my hypothesis with respect to them may eventually be proved true.
(3) The Open Universe
Let us now consider such statements as are given by the Apostle John as coming from
Jesus. The Jews said that Jesus had blasphemed in claiming that he was the Son of God.
Jesus said he was the Son of God and that for him to say so was the simple truth of the
matter. Jesus appealed to the witness of John, to the witness of the Father and to the
witness of the works he had done, the miracles which his Father had given him to do.
And he appealed to Scripture. But in the last analysis he asks his listeners to believe his
own witness to himself on his own authority. Though I witness of myself, said Jesus, my
witness is true because I know whence I came and whither I go. When the apostle John
tells us that Jesus is the Word, that the Word was with God and was God, that all things
are made by him and consist by him, then he is only witnessing in the name of Christ
himself. Jesus as the Son of God alone could identify himself as the Son of God and Son
of man, and tell us what he came to do in the world.
If now we are to apply the inductive method to these statements in the way that
Beegle applies it, we must accept this self-identification of Jesus as being merely a
datum. We must accept it as a primary datum, to be sure, but no more than as a datum,
the truth of which is still to be determined by reason.
And what is reason? Reason is an activity of man assumed to be able at least to
discover truth and distinguish it from error by testing hypotheses with respect to the facts
about the world and reason itself by resources that it has within itself.
Let us suppose then with Beegle that the matter of truth has already been settled
before reason comes upon the scene, then the statements made by Jesus must be shown to
be in accord with an already existent truth. But this is to deny the authority of Christ who
said: I am the way, the truth and the life. Indeed the Christian is allowed to have his faith
with respect to these religious matters but he cannot be permitted to give them intellectual
standing until after reason has tested them for objectivity.
But they may acquire intellectual respectability. Surely you wish to stand on common
ground with your fellowman in your scientific enterprise. If you do, then you must not
demand a privileged position for your religious prejudices or, if you prefer, convictions.
Immanuel Kant has shown us that we can know nothing about such Absolutes as the man
Jesus talked about. Belief in an Absolute can at most be a faith construct.
(4) The Closed Universe
If Beegle really intends to use the modern inductive method he must not expect that
his beliefs with respect to Christ and Scripture can ever be proved to be true. Beegle says
that he “acknowledges his genuine belief in the inspiration and authority of Scripture.”
He adds: “Aside from the ultimate authority of the triune God, Scripture is our highest
authority and to it we must defer in our search for God’s revelation and will for us.” 85
These are the words of Beegle the evangelical believer. But there is also Beegle the
would-be inductive scientist. And it is the latter who uses the inductive method in order
to prohibit those who would carry on their search for knowledge in the light of the
assertion that Christ makes about himself as the Son of God and as the Son of man
through whom God reconciles the world unto himself, from proceeding with their work.
But Beegle the scientist should then also be willing to give up his own religious
convictions with respect to anything that goes beyond the power of inductive reasoning to
establish any statement as being true. For the principle of the pure contingency of all
spatial-temporal factuality is presupposed and involved in the inductive method to which
Beegle makes his appeal.
Moreover, the pure contingency idea of modern inductive methodology requires for
its correlative the idea of purely formal universality. Kant speaks of the space-time
intuition of man as the potential knower of the facts of science as being the condition of
their knowability. Man as knower does not, for Kant, create and control the facts of the
world in the way that the God of the Bible creates and controls the facts, but he does
supply the original relationships in terms of which the contingent factual continuum
becomes differentiated. Kant’s scientist needs raw stuff as furnished to him at the outset
of experience but by the time he can speak of any fact as distinguished from any other
fact he finds that he himself has given them original differentiation. Kant’s scientist is the
original Adam who gives not only to animals but to all things their original names. He
forms himself out of the raw stuff of pure contingency and says: Here I am, my name is
man. For Kant human self-identification takes the place of the self-identification of Jesus
when he says that he knows whence he came and where he is going. Kant says, in effect,
that no man can intelligently say any such thing as Jesus said. If Jesus wants us to take
his claim seriously as an intellectual assertion, we must class him with the enthusiasts of
which the world has had too many. If he merely wants us to consider his statement as a
limiting concept, that is quite acceptable, but then we can all say the same thing about
ourselves.
What all this amounts to is to say that Beegle the inductive scientist cannot
communicate with Beegle the believer. Beegle the believer says that he believes in the
authority of God, even of the triune God. Beegle the scientist says, in effect, that we must
use the inductive method for all our search for knowledge and that therefore we cannot
say anything about such a God. Beegle the believer says that he believes in Scripture as
our “highest authority,” but Beegle the scientist says that any statement made by anyone
claiming to be an absolute authority must be judged by the truth that appears in the data
of the universe in general. Beegle the believer may then, as a last resort, seek to save
something of his faith by claiming a privileged position for the data of Scripture, but
85
 Ibid., p. 13.
Beegle the scientist will soon sweep away this privilege with the idea of pure
contingency.
Of course, Beegle the man urges us to use the inductive method in the interest of
putting our faith with respect to the actuality of the absolute claims of Christianity on a
solid and respectable basis. But he is deceiving himself in doing so. If he really wants to
follow the modern inductive method he must give up his Christian faith. If on the other
hand he wants to maintain his Christian faith, he must carry on his inductive research on
the presupposition that it operates in a universe which has unity and diversity in it
because it is what it is ultimately by virtue of the creative-redemptive work of Jesus as
the Son of God and Son of man.
In particular Beegle the scientist must see that his inductivism presupposes a
commitment to a closed universe as well as to an open universe. In fact his method
commits him to a universe that is closed and open at the same time. Beegle the inductivist
presupposes the absoluteness of a view of reality which, in advance, excludes even the
possible truthfulness of the truth claimed by Jesus when he said that he was the Son of
God. For Beegle the inductive scientist to say that he has at least from the beginning
allowed that the Christian hypothesis may yet be proved to be true, is to be uncritical and
is not to realize what is involved in his own methodology. According to modern
inductivism there must always be room for new hypotheses. Therefore the claim of any
man, say of Jesus, to the idea that his hypothesis is the last possible hypothesis and
therewith absolute truth is to forsake the whole idea of the open universe. But by thus
insisting that the universe must always be open, the modern inductive method says that
this universe can never be shown to be what the Christian believer says that it is, namely,
the work of God the Creator-Redeemer. Beegle the scientist is a rationalistic determinist
in that by assumption, he in effect makes a universal negative statement to the effect that
Jesus cannot be the Son of God. If Jesus were the Son of God in the way that Beegle the
believer holds him to be, the world would not be a continuous interaction between a
principle of ultimate contingency and a principle of ultimate formal rationality. Beegle
the believer knows that the universe is what it is as manifesting the work of the Creator-
Redeemer. All the facts of the universe must be seen to be what they are as speaking of
this same Creator-Redeemer, or they are not seen for what they are.
Beegle cannot escape choosing between two mutually exclusive authorities. He must
hold to the authority of man as ultimately self-understanding and as interpreting Jesus the
Christ in terms of his self-understanding, or he must hold to the authority of Jesus as the
Son of God as understanding and as interpreting himself and man in terms of his work as
Creator- Redeemer.
D. Heilsgeschichte
The discussion just finished with respect to the modern inductive method as
committing Christian believers who adopt it in their general search for truth to a denial of
their own basic Christian religious convictions may finally be applied more specifically
to the question of the authority of Christ and the Scripture, as in terms of Heilsgeschichte.
The argument here is identical in nature to that which was carried on above. Beegle has
failed to see that the “high correlation” which he finds between a belief in the inerrancy
of Scripture and a “determinist” view of reality is a mirage. It is he who has committed
himself to a determinist and rationalist denial not only of inerrancy of, but of the
authority of Christ as speaking of himself as the Son of God and Son of man. In this he
has unwittingly followed the procedure of the Pharisees of Jesus’ day. To be sure, the
Pharisees believed in Moses and the prophets. Beegle believes in Christ and the
Scripture. The Pharisees believed in the authority of Moses. Beegle believes in the
authority of Christ. But believing also in the Living Torah, the Pharisees assumed that
their own growing moral consciousness was the final source of truth and errors. So
Beegle believes also in a method that springs from man as autonomous. The Pharisees
interpreted Moses in such a way that he could not possibly be speaking of Jesus as the
Son of God. Moses said to the Israelites: Behold the Lord your God is one Lord. To the
Pharisees these words of Moses could never refer to a direct manifestation of God in
history. In short, the monotheism of the Pharisees was in practice not different from the
monotheism of the Greeks, such as of Plato or of Aristotle. The monotheism of the
Pharisees did indeed hold that men were related to God but that they were related to God
by participation in the being of God. This was, on their view, inherently and equally true
of all men. There could therefore be no one man, as for instance, Jesus, who would in
distinction from all other men be the same in power and substance with the Father. No
man needed salvation by the work of such a Savior. Men were not sinners. Though they
were not all the children of Abraham according to the flesh, they would all be blessed
through Abraham. The Jews must bring this message of sovereign and universal grace to
all the nations. Thus the promises of God to Abraham, that in him should all the nations
of the world be blessed, would be fulfilled.
Over against this understanding that the Pharisees had of themselves and of the
oracles of God revealed in the Old Testament, Jesus asserts himself as being the one
through whose words alone the words and acts of God in the Old Testament have
meaning. In fact the words and deeds of the Old Testament are what they are because
they are the words of Jesus spoken through his servants the prophets.
Thus the Scripture of the Old Testament grew out of, as they were a part of, the
redemptive-revelation of God in history. And to believe them to be what Jesus believes
them to be is to believe that the world is what Jesus believes it to be. And Jesus knows
whence he came and whither he goes.
Luther’s statement to the effect that only that was Christum treibet has final authority
is true, but then we must realize that, in the widest sense of the term, all things manifest
or speak of Christ. 86 All things are created by Christ. All things are brought to their
proper consummation through the work of Christ.
And what is true of the Old Testament is equally true of the New Testament. Christ
gave the apostles the promise of the Holy Spirit so that they would be enabled to speak
with his authority with respect to the meaning of his work after its completion on earth
and his return to glory. “The New Testament kerygma,” says Ridderbos, “is not
revelatory and a part of redemptive history simply because God’s Spirit repeatedly brings
us into contact with the historical and present reality of God in Jesus Christ. The New
Testament is revelation, before everything else, because it itself also in its written form, is
86
 Cf. H. N. Ridderbos, The Authority Of The New Testament Scriptures, Grand Rapids,
1963, p. 31.
the proclamation, prepared by the Holy Spirit, of the redemptive events that occurred in
the fullness of time.” 87
To say this is far from using an ad terrorem argument to the effect that if you do not
believe in Scripture you cannot believe in Christ. Apart from the question that we may
not judge the heart of any man as to whether he truly believes in Christ even though he
has radically mistaken views with respect to Scripture, there is the fact that the sort of
estimation of Scripture that is given by Ridderbos involves primarily a commitment to
Christ as Savior through the regenerating power of the Holy Spirit. He who separates
belief in Christ from belief in Scripture loses Christ because Scripture is the word of
Christ. “Faith in Christ, as he comes to us in the Scripture, teaches us correctly to
distinguish the authority of Scripture in its redemptive historical significance.” 88 “The
words of the apostles are not only human word. They actually are and must be accepted
as the very word of God (1 Thessalonians 2:13).” 89
If Beegle had approached the question of the inerrancy of Scripture by relating it to
the whole question of the historical process of redemption in history through the work of
Christ, he would have saved himself the basic dualism of his present position. To be sure,
he would not have been able to solve all problems. Ridderbos does not claim to have
solved all problems. He does not want to close his eyes to any of the discrepancies that
are found in the manuscripts of Scripture that we possess. No Reformed writer on the
authority and inspiration of Scripture claims to have solved all problems of detail. But
Reformed writers do offer, while Beegle does not offer, an intelligible view of the
relation between the authority of God in Christ speaking through Scripture and a
legitimate scientific methodology with respect to scientific research. This is true because
they begin with Christ as the true light, from which all light in any field proceeds.
Says Ridderbos: “The New Testament can be correctly approached by science only
when the latter recognizes that the witness of Scripture, in the historical sense that we
have developed, is the witness of the Holy Spirit, and any infringement upon this aspect
of this witness, on the part of science, results in a faulty appraisal of the object under
study and the truly Scientific approach is thereby lost.”
A truly scientific approach to Scripture means, for Ridderbos, the acceptance of the
words of Christ as spoken by himself or by his prophets and apostles; they are to be taken
to be true on his unqualified authority. Unless we thus accept Christ as the way, the truth
and the life, there is nothing but Chaos anywhere. If Beegle the believer had followed an
inductive method in his study of Scripture in the way that Ridderbos and many Reformed
exegetes of Scripture before him have, he would have at the same time discovered a truly
inductive method that may be used by science anywhere.
E. Activist Theology
In that case Beegle, together with Ridderbos, would have challenged the activist
theology of such men as Emil Brunner as not merely undermining belief in Scripture but
also in the Christ of Scripture.
87
 Ibid., p. 60.
88
 Ibid., p. 61.
89
 Ibid., p. 23.
In Christ, says Ridderbos, “is not only redemption, but also the trustworthy
communication of redemption.” 90 Again: “Marturia (witnessing) is not only to bear
witness to facts, but it also to tell what these facts mean. It is not only a witness to their
historicity, but it also tells the meaning, the truth of this historicity.” 91
The exact opposite of this point of view is represented by the current activist view of
the revelation of God to man. To mention only Barth and Brunner; it is obvious that for
them there is no directly identifiable revelation of God in history. The idea of a finished
revelation of God through Jesus Christ and with it through his word, as is set forth by
Ridderbos, is anathema to them. They have a view of reality as a whole in which the idea
of contingency is basic and which, therefore, excludes in advance even the possibility of
such a revelation of God through Christ in Scriptures as is set forth in the historic
Christian creeds.
Ridderbos therefore rightly says that such an activist view of Heilsgeschichte is fatal
to a true view of Heilsgeschichte as set forth in Scripture. 92 Beegle, on the other hand,
has no eye at all for the basically destructive nature not only of the idea of inerrancy, but
of the idea of the historical reality of the finished work of Christ, that the modern activist
view of the Christ-Event involves.
Beegle will eventually need to choose between the historic Protestant view of Christ
and the Scripture, and the modern existentialist view of Christ and the Scripture. After he
has done so, a discussion on the problem of inerrancy may have fruitful results.
4. Stuart Cornelius Hackett
It may prove useful if, at this point, we discuss a further effort on the part of an
evangelical Christian to base his faith upon a methodology not involved in or based upon
the creative—redemptive work of Christ.
We take for our purpose the book of Dr. Stuart Cornelius Hackett with the title, The
Resurrection of Theism (Chicago, 1957).
Hackett’s problem is virtually the same as that of Beegle. He, like Beegle, wants to
make Christianity respectable to its cultured despisers. As Beegle takes his inductive
method from modern science so Hackett takes his method of Rational empiricism from
modern philosophy. Beegle might well seek support for his inductivism from Hackett’s
rational empiricism.
Hackett shares Beegle’s intense dislike of Calvinism. In particular Hackett shares
Beegle’s intense dislike of the present writer’s extreme Calvinism. Hackett asserts that
the sinner is able to “believe the Gospel” without the regenerating grace of the Holy
Spirit. Says Hackett: “Thus the presuppositionalist approach lands one ultimately in an
extreme Calvinistic atmosphere. If one feels comfortable here let him remain with this
God who has created rational men as mere puppets of His sovereignty. But if it seem to
be the case that man is under obligation to believe the Gospel and that he must accept
Christ as Saviour before the Spirit of God regenerates the heart—if, I say, man is a moral
and rational agent confronted with a revelation for the acceptance of which he is morally
90
 Ibid., p. 47.
91
 Ibid., p. 68.
92
 Ibid., p. 72.
and rationally responsible then let the presuppositionalist framework be consigned to the
irrationalism that is written so plainly through its structure!” 93
Neither Hackett nor Beegle is directly concerned with an exegetical analysis of the
biblical teaching on sin and salvation. Both men simply assume that the idea of man’s
metaphysical independence of God and of his ethical ability to will the good as over
against the evil is at once both biblical and intelligible. Both men are convinced that
Calvinism is, on the one hand, determinist and is, on the other hand, irrationalist. If then
we are to present the gospel to non-believers we must, according to both Hackett and
Beegle, by all means avoid presenting it in its Calvinist form.
In presenting the gospel to unbelievers, Calvinists have, no way of meeting them on
common ground, How could they? It is of the essence of Calvinism to insist that
Christians and non-Christians begin all their reasonings from “opposing first principles.”
This precludes all intelligible contact between Christians and non-Christians. Says
Hackett: “Denial of common ground and the rejection of rational proof for God. It
follows at once that if the Christian and the non-Christian part company with the espousal
of opposing first principles, there can be no common ground, at the level of philosophical
system, in terms of which the two can meet to accept the same implications of the facts
with which they are both confronted: there is no area of agreement, therefore, in terms of
which the Christian can prove the truth of the Christian God to an unbeliever.” 94 And, as
if it were not enough to break off in advance all possible contact between the Christian
and the non-Christian, Van Til pursues his enemies in their own field. Van Til says that
“the natural man cannot reason correctly on any level of thought. Even logic is not the
same for Christian and non-Christian, and the syllogistic process must be followed in
frank subordination to the notion of a self-sufficient God! The Christian view may thus
contain even what, from a human logical point of view, are self-contradictory
propositions.” 95 Hackett grants that it is only Van Til who has shown himself so
completely ready “thus to sacrifice reason.” 96 So, for instance, Dr. Gordon H. Clark and
Dr. Edward J. Carnell, though they too are presuppositionalists, build their “whole
system” “on the universality of logical laws and the rational categories.” 97
Whatever then may be the concessions to rationality on the part of some of the
presuppositionalists, it remains true that its most consistent expression involves the
complete rejection of all intelligible apologetics.
As over against this extreme or consistent determinism and irrationalism, we must,
argues Hackett, start with “a common basis of rationality and experience in terms of
which the validity of one’s metaphysical assertion is to be justified. Men—if Christian
theism be correct—come to experience with a rational structure of mind which, when
consistently applied to that experience, yields the conclusion that God exists as theism
construes that existence. On the Christian view experience would be unintelligible if God
did not exist: but it is the fact of God’s existence, not the original knowledge of it, which
makes the intelligibility of experience possible. Unbelievers, after all, do, like Christians,
93
 Ibid., p.94
 Ibid., p.95
 Ibid., p.96
 Ibid., p.97
 Idem.
174.
160.
163.
163.
apprehend their experience as rational: what they fail to do is to carry through this
apprehension to its highest explanation in the affirmation of God’s reality; or else they
volitionally reject the conviction they may thus reach by a logical interpretation of the
ultimate possibility of existence.” 98
On Van Til’s view “argument is impossible. Period!” 99 If Christians are to engage in
argument with unbelievers there must be a “true common ground.” And this means that
“presuppositionalism is repudiated.” 100 “I therefore conclude that since metaphysical
presuppositionalism is thus entangled in such a mass of self-contradictions, it forms no
valid approach to the knowledge of God. And thus perishes the last principal alternative
to rational empiricism as a basis for Christian—or any other—apology. With her
opponents thus languishing in defeat, reason pushes on to consider experience itself to
determine whether God is real!” 101
A. Rational Empiricism
We turn now to look at the Rational Empiricism in terms of which we, as Christians,
may, according to Hackett, escape the “mass of self-contradictions” of the most
consistent presuppositionalists and establish a genuine apologetic for Christianity.
Turning our eyes away from the determinist-irrationalism of a man like Calvin we at
once seek help from Immanuel Kant. “It was in the year 1781 that Immanuel Kant
published the Critique Of Pure Reason. In that book, Kant came the first systematic
champion of rational empiricism.” 102 With Kant we hold that “knowledge would be
impossible on either a purely rational or a purely empirical basis.” 103 Stating his view
positively Hackett says: “Rational Empiricism, as I profess it, is the doctrine that
knowledge is possible only because it involves the combination of two elements: a mind
that comes to experience with a structure of thought in terms of which it is necessarily
disposed to understand that experience—this is the a priori or ‘before-experience’
element; data upon which this structure of thought terminates to gain specific knowledge
particulars—this is the a posteriori ‘after-experience’ element.” 104
of or(1) Critical Alteration Of Kant’s Views
While Kant’s epistemology of rational empiricism is thus generally acceptable to
Hackett, he proposes some alterations detail. 105
ofWe must first, argues Hackett, maintain against Kant that the categories of human
thought need not be limited to sensuous content. 106 We must maintain against Kant that
98
 Ibid., p. 167.
99
 Ibid., p. 170.
100
 Ibid., p. 175.
101
 Ibid., p. 175.
102
 Ibid., p. 39.
103
 Ibid., p. 37.
104
 Ibid., p. 37.
105
 Ibid., p. 46.
106
 Ibid., 52.
p.human knowledge need not be limited to the phenomenal realm. “The categories do give
us a knowledge of things-in-themselves.” 107 We must insist that “even God does not
snatch the categories out of the blue.” If “the categories are actually preconditions of
intelligibility they are just as essential for divine thought as for human.” 108 Thus over
against such a man as Van Til who urges “that in order to interpret reality correctly, man
must work within the propositional revelation of Scripture” and who says that “ ‘for the
human mind to know any fact truly, it must presuppose the existence of God,’ ” 109 our
task is “simply to show that every knowledge experience does presuppose a synthetic a
priori factor: that even the opponent of rational empiricism can state his case only on the
supposition that it is false.” 110 “The denial of the synthetic a priori is either self-
contradictory or meaningless.” 111
Here Hackett has reached rock bottom. “Intelligible experience presupposes the
synthetic a priori.” 112 “After all, either thought starts with some general principles with
which the mind is initially equipped, or it cannot start at all. Thought consists of ideas
and judgments, as we have seen: and the very first act of judging presupposes that the
thinker has a structure of thought in terms of which subject and predicate may be united
according to certain relations.” 113
Hackett sets his view over against the position which holds that “one must start with
the assumption that the God who has spoken in Scripture is the true God.” 114
(2) “Men Do Build Garages, Don’t They?”
With Kant, Hackett maintains that if we are to explain the fact of knowledge we must
presuppose an “innate equipment” in man, “not as ideas of consciousness, but as forms
by which thought operates.” 115
Suppose that I want to build a garage. To do so “presupposes a knowledge of my
environment and the capacity to make judgments about that environment.... ” 116
So we conclude that “ultimately, it is just the faculty of judgment itself that is
presupposed prior to experience, even for the simple task of building a garage. And men
do build garages, don’t they?” 117
According to Hackett, then, rational empiricism is obviously the only position which
can explain any simple empirical fact. He who thinks that he can build a garage on any
other principle than that of rational empiricism finds himself in the unhappy position of
standing upon the position he is seeking to deny. He looks like the man who is trying to
107
 Ibid., p. 55.
108
 Ibid., p. 55.
109
 Ibid., p. 159.
110
 Ibid., p. 56.
111
 Idem.
112
 Ibid., p. 57.
113
 Ibid., p. 57.
114
 Ibid., p. 158.
115
 Ibid., p. 58.
116
 Idem.
117
 Ibid., p. 58, 59.
lift the cover off a man-hole while standing on it himself. And if Beegle should attempt to
use his inductive method without presupposing the “general principles or categories
which are presupposed in every act of thought,” he too would be in such a ridiculous
position. But we may be sure that Beegle would do no such thing. Beegle has told us that
induction is merely the first method to use. His induction is not complete in itself. It
needs something in the way of deduction. “Sound results are obtained when induction
precedes deduction.” 118 Beegle is now in a position to see clearly that Hackett is his
friend. Hackett has shown clearly that some “innate principle” is required in the way of
furnishing the relationships between the facts of the inductive method. Hackett has also
shown him that it is Kant who has first and best among modern men shown how, fact and
law, particular and universal, are really brought together. Kant has shown how neither
pure rationalism nor pure empiricism can account for the fact that men build garages.
Thus Kant has saved science by bringing induction and deduction in proper relation to
one another. Kant saved science by restricting knowledge to the phenomenal realm.
Science can realize its ideal of universality and therefore of predictability if only it will
realize that such universality and predictability are inherent in the equipment with which
the faculty of judgment comes to the very first fact of experience. At the same time
science can also realize its ambition to add what is genuinely new to what is already
known at any given time. Kant has shown how synthetic a priori judgments are possible.
Kant has explained the methodology of science. Kant has thus shown how science is
possible by his great discovery that it is man himself who is the ultimate and therefore
active organizer back of scientific activity.
(3) Der Seele Atmet Frei Aus
Up to the time of Kant, man found himself in a sad predicament. He knew that he
needed absolute freedom if he was to continue to think of himself as morally responsible.
And he knew that he needed absolute determinism if he was to have scientific
knowledge. How can one have both?
It was Kant who solved this problem and set man free. After Kant man could explain
his scientific methodology and at the same time have his moral freedom. Kant proved
that the goal of comprehensive and exhaustive rational understanding is the ideal of
science but that it must be maintained only as an on-going goal. The laws of science are
absolute but they are absolute as relational to the absolutely raw stuff of experience. The
laws of science can therefore never reach out beyond the phenomenal realm. And this
means further that knowledge, scientific knowledge, can never be attained about man
himself as free. The old metaphysic is done with forever. There is no more knowledge of
man as free, there is no more knowledge of a God who is not correlative to the world.
Of course man “knows” himself to be free but then this knowing is a wholly other
sort of knowing than the knowing of which the scientist speaks. Once this fact is seen for
what it is, it appears that now, for the first time, man is really able, without contradiction,
to assert both his absolute freedom or autonomy and yet be absolutely true to the ideal of
science as the realm of impersonal relations. Man has at last attained to true inwardness.
He no longer fears any miraculous intrusions in the realm of science. Is he not the
118
 Op. Cit., 12.
p.absolute lawgiver there? The only law that manifests itself in the realm of science springs
from the innate relationizing equipment found in man. Again man no longer fears any
“supernatural” intrusions into his moral consciousness, when he bows in reverence before
the moral law and when he worships God as the law-giver, he knows that he is bowing to
an image of the ideal self. In particular, he now knows that when he pays homage to the
Christ incarnate in history, he is bowing to the ideal of realizing, to some extent in the
space-time world, something of the brotherhood of man that he has set before himself as
an ideal. So also when he speaks of the Church of this Christ-ideal he thinks of it as a
continuation of this ideal incarnation. Kant likes to see an increasing realization of the
kingdom of God in which all human beings treat each other as persons. And this would,
then, include all higher religions and the cause of ecumenism would be making ever-
increasing progress.
All of this appears to be involved in the idea of building garages in terms of Kant’s
philosophy.
B. I Am The Way, The Truth And The Life
But garages cannot be built in terms of Kant’s philosophy. Kant did not save science,
and he did not make room for true religion.
In the first place Kant did not save science. His idea of science rests upon the idea of
ultimate human autonomy. The a priori equipment which he employs in order to identify
factuality would, if allowed to function unrestrained, reduce all factuality to one abstract
universality. The only way Kant’s innate equipment can be kept from thus destroying
newness in science is for pure contingency to act as a counteracting instance. But then to
the extent that pure contingency acts as a correlative counteracting instance to pure,
relational universality, to that extent universality is gone.
Then, too, Kant left no room for true religion. It has often enough been pointed out
that on Kant’s view the world cannot in any sense manifest the presence and activity of
God. This is too obviously true to need further elucidation. The space-time world is for
Kant what it is because of the combination of pure contingency and pure rationality, and
it is the universal human mind that is presupposed as the source of this interrelation. For
Kant the heavens cannot declare the glory of God. The divine original of nature appears
to be man. Man has taken the place of the God of historic Christianity. Man is the one
whose action makes nature into what it is. Yet Hackett speaks of the resurrection of
“theism” in terms of Kantian Philosophy.
To be sure Hackett has, as noted, sought to alter Kant’s philosophy so as to make
room for the knowledge of a God who is beyond the world of nature. But this alteration
cannot be adjudged successful. Hackett assures us that his alteration of the Kantian
categories does not deny that the “synthetic a priori element in knowledge is strictly
categorical and relational.” 119 But if this is true, Hackett’s attempt to make the categories
apply beyond the realm of sense must fail. For it is this very relational nature of the
categories that makes them interdependent with sensuous experience. It is their relational
character that guarantees their purely formal nature. It is this purely formal nature that is
required if there is to be the possibility of their applicability to space-time factuality at
119
 Ibid., p. 46.
any point. If, with Spinoza, or with Parmenides, Hackett wants speculative knowledge, he
must, with them, lose his identity in a world of determinist, timeless being and thought.
We may well urge Hackett, then, to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Kant has set him
free.
Hackett argues that to accept the Kantian principle of rational empiricism we need
not, with him, limit the categories to the phenomenal world. “ ... the categories are forms
of things-in-themselves (noumena) as well as forms of thought, or of things as they
appear to (phenomena).” 120
usBut, on Kant’s view, the idea of things-in-themselves would make the genuinely
scientific knowledge of even one fact impossible. For Kant, genuine scientific knowledge
means systematic knowledge. For any finite human “subject” to know itself at all or for
any finite “object” to be known at all, their relationships of interdependence and teraction
must be exhaustively displayed or predictable. They must be exhaustively rationalizable.
“Things-in-themselves” are anything but that. They are like pockets of independent
qualities that will never submit to generalization. If, together with such men as Locke and
his empiricist descendants, Hackett wants to retain things-in-themselves, he must be
ready, with them, to sink back into the pool of ultimate irrationality, or to subside into the
dogmatic slumber from which Kant was aroused by Hume.
A more basic issue now faces Hackett. He has failed to see that in his attempt to
combine the pre-Kantian Dogmatism of the Empiricists and Rationalists and Kantian
Criticism, he has not attained the freedom and rationality that he seeks. Hackett thinks
that he has found a theory of knowledge on the basis of which he can make a genuine
choice between mutually exclusive systems of metaphysics. Apparently he does not see
that his epistemology involves a metaphysics. And the metaphysics involved in his
epistemology is such as to reduce man to an abstract focus of interaction between an
abstract eternal form that would set man free from absorption into pure temporal being by
absorption into itself and an abyss of ultimate contingency that would set man free from
such an absorption into timeless being by means of its absorption into a bottomless and
shoreless ocean of flux.
It scarcely needs to be indicated that Hackett the evangelical believer has been tricked
by Hackett the philosopher into paying too great a price for his escape from the
determinism and irrationalism of Calvinism which he so dreads.
Hackett the believing Christian bows before the authority of Christ when he says that
his witness to himself as the Son of God and Son of man must be accepted at his
authority. Christ says that through him all things are made and that by him all things
consist. Christ says that no one can come to him except the Father draw him. Christ says
that all men are by virtue of their sin spiritually dead, and, as such, hostile to God their
Creator, and that knowing God, by virtue of their being created in his image, they hold
under the truth in unrighteousness. Christ said that, sent by the Father, he came to save
the world through his being made a a curse, through his being made sin for man. Christ
said that all the facts of the universe, the facts of creation and the facts of redemption, can
be seen for what they are only if they are seen thus in the light of what he is and what he
has done.
120
 Ibid., p. 46.
As noted earlier, in Jesus’ day the Pharisees told Jesus that he blasphemed when, in
saying such things, he made himself one with God. They made their own sinful moral
consciousness the ultimate source and standard by which they judged Jesus’ claims. This
is precisely what Kant has done in modern times. The whole of Kant’s epistemology
presupposes the absolutely free or autonomous moral self as the source of law both for
the phenomenal and for the noumenal realm. Kant’s own work, Religion Within the
Limits of Pure Reason, shows that he will accept the claims of Christ only on condition
that he can reinterpret them, reducing them to nothing more than means by which self-
sufficient moral man may lift himself up by his own bootstraps toward the realization of
his own humanized ethical ideal. Why then does Hackett the philosopher virtually take
sides with the Pharisees against the Christ of the Scriptures, and therefore against Hackett
the believer, on this all-important point?
The Pharisees argued, in effect, that Jesus could not be the promised Messiah. Their
position was, in effect, that there never could be a discernible appearance of any Absolute
in the phenomenal realm. To maintain the honor of God, they argued, one must honor an
absolutely formal unity that is above space-time being. How then could Jesus, a spatio-
temporally conditioned man, claim to be one with the Father? If any finite man claims
identity with God, all men are in jeopardy every hour. They must then bow before him as
Lord. They must then be made free by him. But are not the Jews the sons of Abraham?
“We have never been in bondage.”
In similar fashion the position of Kant denies both man’s creation and his fall into sin.
Kant, as well as the Pharisees, refuses to allow that Jesus of Nazareth can possibly have
been the Son of God except in the sense that all men are potentially the sons of God or
participant in the being of God.
Why then does Hackett the philosopher virtually take sides with Kant in denying the
possibility of the knowledge of Christ as the Redeemer-God, and therefore against
Hackett the believer?
In the second place, Hackett argues that Calvinists, and in particular such extreme
Calvinists as C. Van Til, allow for no common ground for discussion between believer
and unbeliever. Hackett the philosopher now provides a common ground by means of the
epistemology of Kant. But if such an epistemology provides a common ground it does so
by destroying the believer altogether. To be sure, the believer is allowed to retain, not
merely some, but all, of the major teachings of Christianity, but then all of these
teachings must be reinterpreted as being symbols or pointers (Hinweise) forward some far
off unknown, unknowable and unrealizable ideal that apostate man sets for himself in
order thereby to resist the ever-present pressure of the claims of Christ upon him.
Modern ecumenical theology has fallen for this trap of Satan. In The Confession Of
1967, the United Presbyterian Church, the historic defender of the unqualified sovereign
claims of Christ, has capitulated to the demands of Kant’s free man. The composers of
this Confession have synthesized all true science, all true philosophy and all true theology
by following the Pharisees and Kant—thereby virtually denying the Christ of the
Scriptures. Hackett the believer surely does not want to follow this lead. Why then does
he allow Hackett the philosopher to make him believe that Kant can set man free?
Finally Hackett says that according to Calvinists, and especially according to that
extreme Calvinist, Van Til, “man, while he ought to do so, nevertheless cannot distill
God from the general revelation.... ” 121 How then, he asks, “is any apologetics
possible?”
Hackett disagrees with Van Til who says that “it is only when the Holy Spirit gives
man a new heart that he will accept the evidence of Scripture about itself and about
nature for what it really is.... ” 122 Kant again appears as savior. And this in spite of the
fact that for Kant nature is exclusively revelational of man rather than of God. Or if we
accept the alteration of Kant’s doctrine of the categories, then we may allow that God and
man together may find themselves in the nature they are jointly engaged in confronting
and creating.
It is thus that Hackett the philosopher attains to the “resurrection of theism.” But the
God of this theism cannot be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The “theism”
thus resurrected is destructive of the possibility of intelligent human predication whether
with respect to the “phenomenal” or “noumenal” sphere.
C. Heilsgeschichte Again
Looking back we recall that we started our discussion of the Protestant doctrine of
Scripture by an analysis of the views of Warfield and of Bavinck. Both men view the
place of Scripture as imbedded in their total outlook on life. They do not build the first
story of their house by reason in order then to add a second story built by faith. Their
outlook on life is a living whole. For convenience we speak of this total outlook on
reality as a world and life view.
Warfield and Bavinck take this world and life view from the Scripture as the
revelation of God through Christ and his Apostles to sinful man. The Holy Spirit gives
them the conviction that what confronts them in Scripture is the Word of Christ.
According to the teaching of Scripture, in all that happens in the world of “men and
things” Christ is establishing his kingdom as he destroys the kingdom of Satan. Man was
originally created in the image of God. As such he was perfect. The world about him was
perfect. All the facts about him as well as his own constitution within him spoke of God
the Creator to Adam and Eve. From the beginning God supplemented the revelation of
himself in the facts of the created world by verbal communication. By means of this
thought-communication God gave man the task of subduing the world. Quite properly
this task has been called man’s “cultural mandate.”
Man listened to Satan who told him he should strive to be like God. In Adam’s fall all
men sinned (Rom 5:12). Born, since the fall with an evil nature, all men continue all their
life to hate God and their fellow man. Fallen man makes his own supposed welfare
instead of the kingdom of God the goal of all his cultural striving. He uses the inductive
method in order to collect facts which, he assumes, do not reveal God. He uses the
deductive method which, he assumes, rests on an abstract principle of rationality that
envelopes God and man alike. He can never get his “logic” and his “facts” together in
any intelligible way. Like a drowning man in desperation draws his savior down with him
into the bottomless deep, so the sinner seeks to draw his Creator down with him into pure
contingency. Whether he eats or drinks or does anything else, apostate man does it all for
121
 Ibid., 164.
p.122
 Ibid., p. 163, 164.
his own glory. At last he finds himself at the swine-trough, unable to fill his belly with
the husks of swine, and unwilling to return to the father’s house.
But God sent his Son into the world to save the world. He who knew no sin was made
sin for us that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. God the Father
quickens, God the Son quickens and God the Spirit regenerates men so that they believe
and accept Jesus Christ and all his benefits. Now men undertake their cultural mandate
anew. Their image renewed in Christ in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily,
they would now, instead of following Satan, destroy him and his kingdom. As they do so,
they establish the kingdom of Christ. Whether they eat or drink or do anything else, they
would to it to the glory of Christ.
Through Christ all things were made, in him all things consist, to him all things
belong. Every effort on the part of Satan to retain men for his service will, ultimately,
fail. Satan has already been defeated. Christ’s work is finished. Yet it is finished in
principle only. Not till Christ comes again will the restitution of all things take place.
Accordingly the struggle between those who are for and those who are against Christ
goes on till the end of time. The warfare between Christ and Satan is a global warfare. It
is carried on in the field of science and philosophy as well as in the field of theology.
Every fact in the universe is in dispute. Every fact belongs to Christ. To him all
authority was given. A proper inductive method works on this assumption. Every
principle of logic is given the image-bearer of God so that by it he may relate all the facts
of Christ’s estate in “systematic” order so as thereby the better to manipulate them to the
glory of Christ.
D. The Other Heilsgeschichte
But Satan continues to control the hearts of many men.
He blinds their minds so that they cannot see the clear light of the sun. As at the
beginning, so throughout history, Satan insinuates into the hearts of men the idea that
their true freedom lies in their independence from the creative-redemptive work of Christ.
With Sartre, man would rather be free in a vacuum than free in Christ. He would rather
assume that facts are not created and that logic is an abstraction and fail ever to get them
together, than to presuppose their unity in Christ. He would rather work out his own
salvation by setting his own ideals, by following the standard of his own moral
consciousness, by the strength of his own will power rather than be saved by grace
through Christ.
When confronted with the offer of salvation through Christ, he makes over,
refashions, reinterprets this Christ, so as to make him conform to his own ideals. And
these ideals continue to change forever.
And in transforming the Christ of Paul into a Christ ˆ la Kant, modern churchmen, at
the same time, transform the Word of the Apostles into a symbol pointing to the unknown
and unknowable Christ they have made for themselves.
Upon those who, by the grace of God, have been given the vision of the cultural
mandate (undertaken afresh through the finished work of Christ) falls the task of
beseeching all men everywhere to give up their vain search for freedom and meaning
which they look for in the abyss of the unrelated.
Believers in Christ have been saved by grace. They use, they must use, their powers
of logical reasoning and of factual observation in order to point out to those who reject
the overtures of grace through Christ, that unless they repent they are lost and their
culture gone to ruin.
It is in every instance the failure to see clearly that the “problem of the Bible” is an
aspect of this global struggle, that causes evangelical Christians to fall into difficulty. Of
course, even they who do relate their view of Scripture to their total outlook of life as
taken from Scripture cannot solve every problem. But they do have the means wherewith
they can see all “problems” whether with respect to biblical data or other data in the
proper light. They can set all problems in the light of the creative-redemptive work of
Christ. Without this light no true problem can even be differentiated from a pseudo-
problem. Without this light we have nothing but the darkness of the night in which all
cows are black.
In conclusion we return briefly to the pronouncements of Vatican 2.
In his book The Second Vatican Council And The New Catholicism, Dr. G. C.
Berkouwer has a fairly optimistic view with respect to the changes that are taking place
in the Roman Catholic church. In earlier works Berkouwer stressed the fact that
according to Romanism the church is the continuation of the incarnation, and that,
therefore, there was a basic contrast between her views of sin and grace and those
entertained by the Reformers. And this contrast was particularly acute with respect to the
Reformation idea of sola Scriptura. In this Berkouwer followed Herman Bavinck.
In his latest work, however, Berkouwer seems to think that the gulf between the
Mother-church and the churches of the Reformation may possibly be crossed. And
Berkouwer finds some measure of support for this hope, he thinks, in the new theology.
Berkouwer speaks of a “new climate of life and thought in the Catholic Church”
today. 123
Through the influence of such men as Yves Congar and others, there has come about,
says Berkouwer, “a more open-mindedness toward the Reformation which in turn has
created a far better possibility for dialogue than has been known since the sixteenth
century.” 124 “Roman Catholics are putting increasing emphasis on the new possibility of
an existential encounter between Rome and the Reformation.” 125 “Van de Pol, for
example ... rejects the traditional black-white picture and speaks of the providential task
that the Reformation shall one day fulfill.” 126 There is, says Berkouwer, in, the church, “a
more inclusive vision of the truth” than was formerly present there, and adds that
“obviously, to speak of a simple ‘return’ to the Mother Church does not fit well with this.
Rather, we hear of a ‘growing together toward the fulness of Christ.’ ” 127 “Catholic
theologians are insisting urgently that Catholic theology refuses to sacrifice sola fide-sola
123
 The Second Vatican Council and the New Catholicism Lewis B. Sinedes, Grand
tr.Rapids, 1965, p. 34.
124
 Ibid., p. 39.
125
 Ibid., p. 40.
126
 Idem.
127
 Ibid., p. 40.
gratia to the Reformation, that Catholicism too seeks to preserve the truth of the
128 129
complete gratuity of grace.” Was not this the “deepest intent of Trent?” they say.The new theologians, says Berkouwer, are bringing into the arena of discussion new
insights into the Catholic doctrines of justification, Scripture and tradition, the
infallibility of the Church, and so forth. “We contend that we are observing a new
interpretative phase of Roman Catholicism.” 130 basic question facing ProtestantsA is
whether the new theology aims merely at “new forms of expression” of the old faith or at
radical revision of the Confession the Church. 131
ofIn our estimation of the nature of the tensions within the Mother Church the question
of Scripture is, says Berkouwer, all important. The new theologians argue that Trent
“leaves Catholics free to identify themselves with the notion that tradition is not a source
of revelation on the same level with Scripture, but is only an interpretative source. Trent,
it is argued, leaves Catholics free to identify themselves with the very ancient tradition of
the Church according to which all the truth salvation is contained in Scripture.” 132
ofReflecting on this new view of Scripture, Berkouwer says: “All kinds of questions
rise out of the new situation, foremost of which in our minds is whether a new outlook is
now possible in regard to the Reformation doctrine of sola Scriptura which, until now,
has always been considered, along with sola fide, sola gratia and solo Christo, an
exclusive Reformation credo.” 133
Our question now is whether Mother Church is calling us to a common presentation
of the gospel of salvation by grace as set forth in Scripture to the modern world.
The change in Berkouwer’s attitude toward Roman Catholicism follows upon and
resembles his change of attitude toward Barth. In an early work Berkouwer rejected
Barth’s views as “more nominalistic than those of Occam.” More recently he wrote a
book, The Triumph of Grace in the Theology of Karl Barth. In this work, he speaks of
Barth’s basic desire to carry on the principles of the Reformation. And the “new
theologians” are pictured as possibly leading the church into a better appreciation of
salvation by grace alone. Says Berkouwer: “Many writers among Roman Catholics
witness strongly to the idea that there is a Catholic sola fide-sola gratia.” 134 Are not
“Catholics continually reminding us that Rome has rejected synergism?” 135
We cannot here discuss this new theology. It will be the responsibility of Berkouwer
to show where, in the works of these new theologians, the basically dynamic categories
which the church originally borrowed from the philosophy of Aristotle have been
renounced in favor of the truly biblical or religious-ethical categories which the
Reformers took from Scripture. These “new theologians” may have been influenced by
the activist principles of modern existentialism, but why should that lead them toward a
favorable view of the Reformation view of theology and of Scripture? Barth’s activism
128
 Ibid., p. 41.
129
 Ibid., p. 43.
130
 Ibid., p. 53.
131
 Ibid., p. 54.
132
 Ibid., p. 97.
133
 Idem.
134
 Op. Cit., p. 41.
135
 Idem.
does, indeed, enable him to say that Jesus is God and that the Bible is the Word of God.
But this fact is no indication of any sympathy with the views of Luther and-of Calvin
either with respect to the doctrine of the person of Christ or with respect to the doctrine of
the Scripture. Barth’s activism even more obviously than Rome’s dynamism, is based on
a realist nominalist denial of the Creator-creature distinction on which the whole structure
of Reformation theology is built.
The Documents of Vatican 2 reveal clearly that there has been no change in Roman
Catholic teaching with respect to salvation by grace alone and with respect to the view of
Scripture at all. The anathema sit has disappeared, but the teaching authority of the
church, centered in the Pope, remains as absolute as ever. “The Roman Pontiff, as the
successor of Peter, is the perpetual and visible source and foundation of the unity of the
bishops and of the multitude of the faithful.” 136
Whatever the “new theologians” may discover about the oneness of Scripture and
tradition as the source of doctrine, and whatever they may say about the priority of
Scripture over tradition, it is all to none effect. Always and without fail it is the infallible
teaching authority of the church that ultimately determines the meaning of what Scripture
says in words. And it is this interpretation of Scripture given by the final teaching
authority of the church that is, to all intents, taken to be identical with revelation. “But
when either the Roman Pontiff or the body of bishops together with him defines a
judgment, they pronounce it in accordance with revelation itself. All are obliged to
maintain and be ruled by this revelation, which, as written or preserved by tradition, is
transmitted in its entirety through the legitimate succession of bishops and especially
through the care of the Roman Pontiff himself.” 137
To all intents and purposes the effect of thus maintaining the virtual identity of the
church’s interpretation of Scripture teaching at any particular stage of history
presupposes the priority of tradition over Scripture. “Sacred tradition” and “sacred
Scripture” are said to flow “from the same divine well-spring” and they are said “in a
certain way” to “merge into a unity and tend toward the same end.” “Sacred tradition and
sacred Scripture form one sacred deposit of the word of God.” To interpret this “word of
God, whether written or handed on, has been entrusted exclusively to the living teaching
office of the church.” 138
Thus these three, the tradition, Scripture and the infallible teaching office of the
church “are so linked and joined together that one cannot stand without the others, and
that all together and each in his own way under the action of the one Holy Spirit
contribute effectively to the salvation souls.” 139
ofIt is the moment-by-moment teaching of the church that thus forms to all intents and
purposes the revelation of God and his Holy Spirit by which the faithful must live. People
who live in the city no doubt have a theoretical knowledge of the fact that milk comes
from cows. In practice, they get their milk in bottles from the A and P store.
But what a poor illustration this may appear to be. The A and P stores merely
distribute the milk. Certainly they do no harm to it. And those who have pasteurized,
136
 Chapter 44.
3, p.137
 Ibid., p. 49.
138
 Ibid., pp. 117, 118.
139
 Ibid., 118.
p.homogenized and bottled the milk before it stands waiting for you in the A and P cooler
have done only that which is good for you. How could you go to a farm and get two
quarts of fresh milk every morning? And how could you expect to pasteurize and
homogenize your own milk? Surely the faithful must be thankful for what it has done and
is doing so that you may have the pure milk of the Word!
But then precisely here the Reformers come in. They tell us that the natural man will
not preserve, and hand down the deposit of God’s revelation through Christ in the
Scripture without polluting it in the process.
This is not to suggest that the Popes and bishops are worse sinners than are other
sinners. It is merely to suggest that they are not basically holier than are other men. Christ
has therefore not given the final interpretation of his person and work into the hands of
men beyond those whom by his Spirit he qualified to be the authors of the Scripture. Sola
Scripture et Solus Christos.
So long as the “living” church has the final teaching authority, so long does some
form of dynamic or actualistic philosophy lead men to misinterpret the Scripture. Vatican
2 speaks of the Scriptures as “teaching firmly, faithfully, and without error that truth
which God wanted put into the sacred writings for the sake of our salvation.” 140 But
when “the living tradition of the whole church” 141 used to enlighten the church as to
isthe meaning of Scripture, “the most sacred mystery of the cross is seen to have been
instituted by Christ in order to perpetuate the sacrifice of the Cross throughout the
centuries until he should come again.... 142
”Thus it is that a process philosophy at least basically similar to that which was
introduced into the church when, in the Middle Ages, the potentiality-act scheme of
Aristotle began to dominate the church’s theology, continues now. Vatican 2 insists that
the Mass is a continuation of the sacrifice of Christ. The once-for-all finished work of
Christ, together with the once-for-all finished revelation of God through Christ in
Scripture is anew and afresh given over to the tender mercies of a dynamic theory of
reality in which the Creator-creature relationship so clearly taught in Scripture is given
up.
The reader may turn to an article by Dr. C. Trimp in Lucerna (June, 1966) for a fuller
discussion of the Vatican 2 Constitution with respect to revelation. In this article Trimp
points out that there has been nothing like a return to the Reformation view of Scripture.
Those who would truly follow Reformation principles, says Trimp, will need to continue
to insist on the Sola Scriptura against, not with Rome. 143
The struggle to which, in effect, Trimp refers, is made more difficult than ever now
that new theologians like Hans Urs Van Balthasar and Hans Küng seek for ecumenical
contact with the followers of Barth. The new alliance is that of the Rome-Barth axis as
over against the Luther-Calvin axis.
1
140
 Ibid., Chapter 3, p. 119; reference is here made to 2 Timothy 3:16–17, Greek text.
141
 Ibid., p. 120.
142
 Ibid., p. 154.
143
 Ibid., p. 142.
1
Van Til, Cornelius ; Sigward, Eric H.: The Works of Cornelius Van Til, 1895-1987.
electronic ed. New York : Labels Army Co., 1997
Appendix 1: General And Special Revelation
In this appendix we are concerned to discuss the relation between general and special
revelation in Reformed theology. The Reformed view of both general and special
revelation underlies and is implied in everything that has been said thus far about the
Protestant, and in particular, about the Reformed view of Scripture.
1. Roman Catholicism
This total outlook has historically developed in relation to Roman Catholicism. A
good deal of light is therefore likely to be shed on the Reformed view of revelation by
comparing it with the Roman Catholic view.
In making this comparison we are interested in learning how various Reformed
theologians conceive of it. Our question is: How did Reformed theology, or how does
Reformed theology, think of its own position in contrast with that of Romanism, with
reference to the problem of revelation?
We need for our purposes to take only two typical statements of contemporary
Reformed theologians. Says Dr. G. C. Berkouwer: “According to Rome, the two sources
of knowledge—reason and faith—correspond to the two modes of revelation—natural
and supernatural. In the nineteenth century, the Roman Catholic Church, in speaking out
emphatically against all kinds of heresies, condemned all who say that man with his
natural reason is unable to know the Creator through the created world. There are,
however, also truths which can be known only by way of supernatural special
revelation.” 1 The first Vatican Council stressed the fact that natural revelation, revelation
in and through the facts of the universe, results in natural theology and natural morality.
Romanism distinguishes sharply between knowledge thus obtained by reason and
knowledge of such mysteries as the Trinity which are received by faith.
Of special interest is the fact that by thus speaking of two sources and two kinds of
knowledge, Roman Catholicism seeks to do justice to the knowledge of unbelievers.
“Only in this way, it is said, is one able to do justice to the ‘varieties of knowledge’ of
God (no matter how distorted) outside of Christianity and special revelation, as well as to
the conceptions of morality and the sense of duty which we still meet everywhere in life.”
2
Not only does Romanism seek to do justice to the knowledge and morality of
unbelievers, it also has a definite apologetic purpose in mind. It is by maintaining that
reason can, by itself, apart from supernatural (special) revelation, attain to a measure of
true knowledge of God, that it seeks to answer all forms of agnosticism, anti-
intellectualism and irrationalism. 3
Berkouwer calls attention to the fact that the Romanist conception of natural theology
is based upon and consonant with the Romanist conception of the fall of man. “What is
the background of this conception in which natural reason is considered capable of such
knowledge? It is clear that a specific anthropology is involved here, an anthropology or
1
 De Voorzienigheid Gods, Kampen, 1950, p. 43.
2
 Berkouwer, De Algemeene Openbaring, Kampen, 1951, p. 48.
3
 Ibid., p. 50.
view of man which lifts the so-called rational soul out of the sin-depraved life of man,
and then by way of this non-corrupt reason considers man capable of true knowledge of
God.... It is true that Rome admits that sin has wounded human nature by the loss of
special supernatural gifts, but the physical ability of human reason was neither destroyed
nor disturbed, so that the way of this reason to God remains open. The nature of the
intellect remained intact and so in a certain sense human nature is still open for the
knowledge of God. This reason now operates in the world of created reality and arrives in
this manner at true, though incomplete, knowledge of God.” 4
Still more generally, there lies back of the Romanist notion of the natural light of
reason, the idea of analogia entis. The Romanist anthropology of which Berkouwer
speaks is what it is because of this notion of the analogia entis.
“This ‘self-existent being’ is the central point of the natural knowledge of God. This
divine being can be known by the natural light of reason because there is an ‘analogy of
being’ between God and man. This analogy of being makes an argument from created
reality to the existence of God both possible and meaningful.” 5
Romanist theologians readily grant that natural theology has only relative value. Man
needs supernatural revelation to know and profit from the mysteries of the Christian faith.
Even so, for Romanism it is of the greatest importance to maintain the independence of
natural theology. “All these reservations do not erase the fact that the natural theology of
Rome involves ‘the possibility which the fallen man still possesses’ to know God as
Creator. Rome engages in a bitter fight for this ontic ability of reason.” 6
There are two main points here that are of immediate and basic importance for our
purpose. The one is ethical and the other is metaphysical. Reformed theology cannot
agree with Romanism in its contention that the “reason” of fallen man is not radically
depraved. Similarly Reformed theology cannot agree with Romanism in its assumption
that man is inherently and properly in possession of a measure of ultimacy.
The first point presupposes the second. The Romanist notion of analogy of being
involves the idea of man’s sharing with God in Being. This idea virtually denies the
biblical doctrine of creation.
But without making the distinction between God as Creator basic to all thinking, one
cannot hold that all things, and particularly man in his own constitution, are inherently
revelational of God. Revelation, on the Romanist view, is no longer exclusively the
communication of meaning from the self-contained God to his creature. It becomes rather
the communication of meaning on the part of a more ultimate being to a less ultimate
being, both within or on a scale of Being. Thus the meaning of meaning also changes.
Meaning then no longer is determined exclusively by revelation. Some meaning may
exist and be obtained by man independently of revelation. Man may investigate reality
apart from the idea of revelation. For to him the reality that he investigates is not
exclusively what it is because it is a revelation of God.
Berkouwer therefore asks the question whether Romanism really means what it says
when it speaks of a revelation of God in created reality. For the idea of revelation plays
only a minor role in its conception of natural theology. “In summary, we can say that
4
 Ibid., p. 53.
5
 Ibid., p. 56.
6
 Ibid., p. 58.
Roman Catholic theology involves the relation between man’s rational nature and
‘reality.’ The road to a knowledge of God is by way of logical conclusion. This brings us,
finally, to the question whether Rome really acknowledges a revelation of God in this
created reality. The answer to this question must be in the affirmative. Reference is
frequently made to a revelation of God in nature in distinction from supernatural
revelation. Nevertheless, one is always amazed that this revelation plays but a very small
role in the expositions of natural theology.” 7
2. Calvin
How then, we ask, does the Reformed Faith conceive of the relation of general and
special revelation to one another? In particular, in what way does the conception of
Reformed theology on this matter differ from that of Romanism?
When one reads the second article of the Belgic Confession there is, it must be
conceded, on the surface a similarity between it and the position of Romanism.
Berkouwer points out that Karl Barth simply takes for granted that article two of the
Confession virtually carries on the Roman Catholic idea of natural theology into the
Reformed churches. 8 The second article speaks of two means by which we may learn of
God. The first is that of the creation, maintenance and government of the world. In this
world all the creatures are like so many letters which make manifest to us the invisible
things of God. Reference is made to Romans 1:20. This revelation is sufficient to render
man without excuse. Then there is the second means, namely, that of Scripture, in which
God has revealed himself “yet more clearly and more fully.” From it we may learn what
it is needful to know for our salvation and to live to God’s glory.
It is the phrase “yet more clearly and more fully” that seems to indicate the main
point of connection between the two kinds of revelation. Could this not be taken to mean
that the revelation of God in nature is thought of as not being very clear? True, it says
that the revelation through Scripture is “yet more clear” than is the revelation in nature.
Thus it has in effect said that the revelation of God in nature is also clear. Yet the
impression might be given that one could do full justice to the situation by coming to the
conclusion that the revelation in nature is not very clear. God is said to make himself
known to us (plus manifestement et evidemment pas sa sainte et divine Parole) more
clearly and more evidently in the Word than he does in the facts of the world.
But it appears on second thought that such is not at all the intent of the article. Its
meaning may best be ascertained if it is read in the light of Calvin’s theology. In his
work, Onze Nederladsche Geloofsbelijdenis, Dr. A. D. R. Polman gives a summary of
Calvin’s teaching as a background for his explanation of article two of the Confession of
Faith. I shall briefly summarize his statement for our immediate purpose.
(1) The revelation of God in his works
Calvin, says Polman, lays great stress upon the clarity of God’s revelation in his
words. “He always assumes the evident character of this revelation.” 9 These words
include not only nature in the narrower sense of the world but also the maintenance and
7
 Ibid., p. 60.
8
 Ibid., p. 221.
9
 Op. Cit., Vol. 1, p. 145.
government of the world. “In history He shows His grace, deliverance and judgments—in
short, the words of God are an ocean and an abyss of wisdom.” 10 The fact of God’s
providence is patent in the world.
(2) The effect of this revelation of God
If Adam had not fallen, man would have known God as Creator and Governor of the
world. But Adam did fall, and with him the whole human race. Even so God has
continued to reveal himself to man. In particular man has by nature a sense of deity
which cannot be obliterated. Polman here naturally paraphrases Calvin’s thought of
chapter three, Book One. Says Calvin: “Men of sound judgment will always be sure that
a sense of divinity which can never be effaced is engraven upon men’s minds.” 11
It is not only in man himself but also in his environment that God continues clearly to
manifest himself. Polman here refers to the Institutes, 1:5:10: “We must therefore admit
in God’s individual works—but especially in them as a whole—that God’s powers are
actually represented as in a painting. Thereby the whole of mankind is invited and
attracted to recognition of him, and from this to true and complete happiness.”
But though God manifests himself so clearly to men, “they do not therefore
apprehend God as he offers himself, but imagine him as they have fashioned him in their
own presumption. When this gulf opens, in whatever direction they move their feet, they
cannot but plunge headlong into ruin. Indeed, whatever they afterward attempt by way of
worship or service of God, they cannot bring as tribute to him, for they are worshipping
not God but a figment and a dream of their own heart.” 12
Polman also refers to the Institutes 2:2:18, where Calvin speaks particularly of the
philosophers. Calvin says: “Certainly I do not deny that one can read competent and apt
statements about God here and there in the philosophers, but these always show a certain
giddy imagination. As was stated above, the Lord indeed gave them a slight taste of his
divinity that they might not hide their impiety under a cloak of ignorance. And sometimes
he impelled them to make certain utterances by the confession of which they would
themselves be corrected. But they saw things in such a way that their seeing did not direct
them to the truth, much less enable them to attain it! They are like a traveler passing
through a field at night who in a momentary lightning flash sees far and wide, but the
sight vanishes so swiftly that he is plunged again into the darkness of the night before he
can take even a step—let alone be directed on his way by its help.” “So great is his
blindness that, standing in the midst of light, he sees nothing.... God’s goodness feeds the
unbelievers and feeds them richly, but they gobble it up like pigs for whom acorns fall
from the trees, their snouts always pointed toward the ground.” 13 No one can plead
excuse inasmuch as God’s revelation extends to all men and is fully clear. “God’s
revelation engages us a in such close range that we cannot escape it. We consequently get
some idea of God and reason that this God, however defined, must be honored. But our
intellect falls short of the exact who and how. This world is like a theater in which God
gives us a clear picture of His glory. But we are blind to it; not because the revelation is
dark, but because of our constitutional estrangement. We lack not only the will but also
10
 Ibid., p. 146.
11
 Institutes, trans. by F. L. Battles, Bk. 1:3:3.
12
 Polman, Vol. 1, p. 148, quoting Calvin’s Institutes, 1:4:1.
13
 Polman, Op. Cit., p. 149.
the ability. For even though God reveals Himself clearly, we can only see Him with the
eye of faith. However, the vague taste we have of divinity robs us of every excuse.” 14
(3) Proof from Scripture
In the third place Polman takes up the fact that Calvin finds this evaluation about the
revelation of God in his works and man’s response to it in Scripture. “Unregenerated men
do not even come close to God by way of reason, as is proven by everyday experience.
The two most important aspects of the remnant light consist in the seed of religion and
the distinction between good and evil which remains in their conscience. But neither one
bears fruit—it dies in a thousand superstitions. The natural reason of man will never be
able to direct itself to God.” 15 But no matter how much men may try, under the
instigation of Satan, to suppress the revelation of God in the world, they cannot fully
succeed. 16 Calvin refers to John 1:1–5, to Acts 14 and Acts 17. He constantly refers to
Romans 1. 17 In his commentary on Romans, Calvin says that the revelation of God in his
works is altogether clear. “But man is so blinded that he can see nothing.” 18 Commenting
on 1 Corinthians 1:21 he says that men ought to have known God through wisdom,
through their study of the works of God. “If man had but a spark of healthy intellect, he
would bow down for this in admiration. But the fall of man has spoiled the original order.
His spirit is estranged from God: standing in the midst of light, man sees nothing.” 19 In
Hebrews 11:3 we are told that it is only through faith that we see that the world has been
made by God. Is this to contradict what Paul says in Romans? Does he not there say that
all men recognize God to be their Creator? Is it not because men know God as their
Creator and yet do not worship him that they stand condemned?
Truly, says Calvin, the fact that all men know God as their Creator accounts for the
fact of worship throughout the world. But the worship they have given is false worship.
And this false worship is the concomitant of false ideas about God. At the same time that
they thought of a God, men became vain in their imaginations. “So that rather than
grasping the true God they grope after the shadow of a certain majesty. And this groping
is after a vague opinion, far removed from understanding. They speak of luck instead of
providence. In respect of this light of nature which lights every creature, the spirit of man
is blinded until, by the Spirit of God, they learn to understand through faith what they
never would have understood any other way.” 20
(4) The revelation in God’s holy and divine word
Polman then turns to the familiar discussion of Calvin on Scripture. Scripture is, since
the sinner reads nature so wrongly, the only means by which he may learn of God
effectively. He calls attention to the fact that Calvin uses expressions very similar to the
one used in the Confession to the effect that Scripture yet more clearly and more fully
reveals God than does nature. It makes man to see God as the Creator of nature. And in
addition it gives his revelation of grace.
14
 Idem.
15
 Ibid., p. 151.
16
 Idem.
17
 Idem.
18
 Ibid., p. 152.
19
 Idem.
20
 Ibid., p. 153.
(5) Twofold revelation, twofold order, twofold means
Only he who keeps in mind those points discussed by Calvin, says Polman,
understands the second article of the Confession. The two forms of revelation have back
of them the one incomprehensible being of God. It is he who voluntarily reveals himself
both in his works and in his Word. We are therefore to live by this revelation of God
alone. We are not to seek to pry into God’s essence by some other way. The first
revelation of God through his works is clear and continues to be clear even after the fall.
21
 “It is revelation in the strict sense of the word—the making known of God. It is not a
conclusion reached by reason.” 22 But man holds down this revelation in unrighteousness.
“In his present state man does all he can to eradicate every notion of God. He no longer
knows who and how God is; his foolish heart has become dark. That is why God sends
His second revelation through His Word, in which He gives a clear and true description
of His first revelation and in which He, at the same time, reveals Himself as the Savior in
Christ.” 23
It is therefore necessary to observe, says Calvin, that there is now a different order of
study to be observed than there would have been if Adam had not fallen. The work of
Christ as mediator is restorative of that which was originally given. Accordingly, Calvin
in his Institutes deals first with the revelation of God in his works. This is the proper
order. But since the entrance of sin it is necessary to begin even the study of the works of
God through the Word of God. “Everyone needs the Scriptures as his leader and teacher
in order to come to God the Creator.” 24
Are we then to conclude that there is only one means by which we may learn of God?
Not at all. Believers should do justice to both forms of revelation. With the spectacles of
Scripture they now read with good effect the book of nature and of history.
(6) It is after Polman has thus set forth the position of Calvin that he returns to the
second article of the Confession and says: “He who, after this explanation of the thoughts
of Calvin regarding this problem of the knowledge of God, compares with it this second
article of de Bres, will not be able to admire any change in it. There is not a single untrue,
let alone heretic, thought in it. The rich contemplations disclosed by Calvin are contained
in it, even though they do not appear clearly and consciously. Both the progress of God’s
revelation through and in His works according to the revelation of the Word and the
mutual relationship between the two are clear.” Especially because the comparative
“more clearly and fully involves not our knowledge but God’s revelation. The full
necessity of this progress, however, remains in the dark as does also the reverse order in
the understanding of the revelation, in which knowledge by means of the Word precedes
knowledge by means of God’s works.” 25 Dr. Berkouwer is in essential agreement with
Polman in his evaluation of article two of the Confession.
Ibid., p. 155.
22
 Idem.
23
 Ibid.
24
 Ibid., p. 156.
25
 Ibid., p. 158.
3. Other Confessions
This interpretation given of article two of the Confession also sheds light on the
frequently quoted words of the five articles of Dordt. “Man was originally formed after
the image of God. His understanding was adorned with a true and saving knowledge of
his Creator, and of spiritual things; his heart and will were upright, all his affections pure,
and the whole Man was holy. But revolting from God by the instigation of the devil, and
abusing the freedom of his own will, he forfeited these excellent gifts; and on the
contrary entailed on himself blindness of mind, horrible darkness, vanity, and
perverseness of judgment; became wicked, rebellious, and obdurate in heart and will, and
impure in all his affections.” 26 To this may be added the words of Article 4: “There
remain, however, in man since the fall, the glimmerings of natural light, whereby he
retains some knowledge of God (notitias quasdam de Deo), of natural things, and of the
difference between good and evil, and discovers some regard for virtue, good order in
society, and for maintaining an orderly external deportment. But so far is this light of
nature from being sufficient to bring him to a saving knowledge of God (salutarem Dei
cognitionem pervenire), and to true conversion, that he is incapable of using it aright even
in things natural and civil. Nay further, this light, such as it is, man in various ways
renders wholly polluted, and holds it (back) in unrighteousness; by doing which he
becomes inexcusable before God.” 27 It would be out of keeping to interpret these words
as teaching anything like the natural theology of man Catholicism.
The same may also be said of the Westminster Confession of Faith. The first chapter
of this Confession begins with these words: “Although the light of nature, and works of
creation and providence, do so far manifest the goodness, wisdom and power of God, as
to leave men inexcusable; yet they are not sufficient to give that knowledge of God and
of his will which is necessary to salvation.”
The expression “the light of nature” does not mean, it would seem anything like the
Romanist idea of the “natural light of reason.” It refers rather to man’s innate knowledge
of God. God’s revelation to man in his works is clear and inescapable. But the reaction to
that revelation constitutes the “natural theology” which is, according to Romanism, the
fruit of the light of reason. Romanism omits the element of resistance to the truth in
unrighteousness that is so prominent in the theology of Paul. And it is the sharp accent
upon this element of suppression in the Reformed Confessions, says Berkouwer, and the
inexcusability of man which shows that they understand Romans 1 far otherwise than
does Rome. 28
4. The Picture As A Whole
Let us nowof showing thelook again at the landscape as a whole. We shall do somethingconnection between such points as Calvin has stressed.
in the way
26
 Third and Fourth heads of Doctrine, Article 1, trans. by Schaff, Creeds of
Christendom, Vol. 3, p. 587.
27
 Idem.
28
 De Algemeene Openbaring, p. 127.
(1) General and special revelation find their unity in God who is self-sufficient. Dr.
Valentine Hepp has stressed the idea that Reformed theology is distinguished from other
forms of Christian theology by the great emphasis that it places on the fact of God’s self-
existence. All other theology says Hepp, is in some measure a correlation-theology. For
in other forms of theology God is made to some extent dependent upon man. Only in
Reformed theology is man wholly dependent upon God.
(2) Believers accept this view of God because they accept the Scriptures to be the
Word of God. They have not first worked up a philosophy of theism in order to find this
theism afterwards corroborated by scriptural teaching. With Calvin they have come to
know God as the Creator and controller of the universe because they have regarded the
works of God in the light of Scripture. And they have, with Calvin, learned to take the
Scriptures as the Word of God because they have received the witness of the Holy Spirit
to the divinity of the Scriptures. Involved in this second point is the fact that the
Reformed system of doctrine is composed of elements that are exegetically taken from
Scripture. The Reformed system is not a deduction from a master concept. Nor is it a
mere concatenation of individual items of truth. It is a “system” of truth—an analogical
system of truth. And the idea of analogy is not formed by an independent study of Being,
but by an ordering of the Scripture teaching as a whole.
In discussing the Christian doctrine of providence Berkouwer speaks of the phrase
articuli mixti which has sometimes been applied to such doctrines as creation and
providence. He quotes Herman Bavinck as saying that the belief in the providence of God
is an article of the Christian Faith. 29 Concluding his discussion of Bavinck’s views he
says: “From all this it is clear that Bavinck wants nothing to do with an independent
natural theology.” Bavinck still retains the expression articuli mixti but has in effect
rejected the idea for which it usually stands. And Berkouwer expresses full agreement
with Bavinck’s rejection. His reason is that in the idea of articuli mixti the element of
suppression is practically omitted. 30 “This truly does not apply only to the idea of
creation but also to that of providence.” 31
As for Abraham Kuyper, Berkouwer says he has the same view as that of Bavinck.
Kuyper points out how the doctrine of creation and of providence are “built up out of
Christ” (uit Christus opgebouwd). The Confession of Faith, says Kuyper, does not as
clearly and beautifully show the connection between the work of creation and that of
salvation as does the Catechism. Yet the thought is essentially the same. 32
As to his own position, Berkouwer sums it up by saying: “Also in the confession of
the work of providence the word of Christ applies when he says: No one comes to the
Father but by me.” 33 We must learn of Christ through the Scriptures which we accept as
the word of God through the testimony of the Holy Spirit and his regenerating grace.
(3) But to speak thus of the necessity and priority of Scripture is not in the least to
deny that there is, in another sense, a priority of the works of God. As Polman indicates,
Calvin discusses first the works of God and then the Word of God.. But, strictly speaking,
29
 De Voorzienigheid Gods, p. 44.
30
 Idem.
31
 Idem.
32
 Ibid., pp. 49, 50.
33
 Ibid., p. 51.
it is not possible to speak of a temporal priority of the one over the other. Their relation is
rather that of supplementation. Paul tells us that from the beginning the works of God
challenged men to honor God. And the Genesis narrative, while it relates first the creation
of man in the image of God, forthwith proceeds to supplement this narrative by telling us
of supernatural communication in the way of the covenant that God made with and
ordained for man. Says the Westminster Confession: “The distance between God and
man is so great, that although reasonable creatures do owe obedience unto him as their
Creator, yet they could never have any fruition of him, as their blessedness and reward,
but by some voluntary condescension on God’s part which he hath been pleased to
express by way of covenant.”
Abraham Kuyper also argues for the supplementative character of the two forms of
revelation. He does so by vigorously opposing the idea of their juxtaposition. He points
out especially that the idea of natural revelation cannot be considered as something that
can stand by itself. “It is, indeed, by means of the cognitio specialis that the cognitio
naturalis becomes useful. Only in the light of Scripture is the sinner enabled to account
for the semen religionis in his heart and of the glory which is patent in the world: where
the light of Scripture is hidden I know no more than ‘the unknown God’ even on the
Areopagus.” 34 Even in paradise, he adds, God did not reveal himself to man through
natural revelation independently. Even there God spoke to him. But then, he adds that it
is natural that such should be the case. Supernatural revelation is not inherently and
originally a revelation of grace; it is part and parcel of the normal, and in that sense
natural, relation between God and man.
(4) God therefore addresses man everywhere and always through the one body of his
revelation. Through this one body of revelation God assigns to man, generically
speaking, his cultural task. And mankind is still responsible for that task (Rom 5:12).
Man as sinner is not merely responsible for the revelation that comes to him through the
works of God as they now are. The revelation that now comes to men who have not heard
the gospel is but one aspect of the full revelation that came to him originally. The idea
that God’s revelation to man is clear must primarily be said about revelation as a unit,
inclusive of both supernatural pre-redemptive and natural revelation. The revelation of
God in nature, as it is now, still clearly manifests God. But it is manifestory as a fragment
of, a whole. It is clear therefore when general revelation is seen as calling out for and
needing its supplement in original supernatural revelation. How else could the presence
of the curse of God now resting upon nature be seen for what it is?
(5) If present general revelation is but an aspect of a revelation which includes
supernatural thought communication, then man the sinner must be said to be a covenant
breaker. The whole of revelation was given to mankind as the assignment of a task. Man
has refused to undertake this task. He broke the arrangement or covenant that God
ordained for him.
Man has declared his independence from God. We may therefore call him the would-
be autonomous man. This would-be autonomous man assumes that he is ultimate and
properly the final reference point in predication, i.e., reality must be interpreted by man in
terms of man. He wants to avoid the address of God that comes to him from his own
constitution as well as from the world about him. But he cannot do so fully.
34
 Encyclopaedie der Heilige Godgeleerdheid, Vol. 2, p. 332.
“Nevertheless, life does not remain untouched by the power of God’s revelation. We
understand the sensus divinitatus not as an ‘organ’ of the knowledge of God which
conquered the depravity of human nature but as an inescapable impression received by
man via this power of God.” 35 It was by thus stressing the inescapability of God’s
revelation as it comes to man especially through his sense of deity and through the
sinner’s effort at suppressing this revelation that Calvin effected in principle a complete
break between the idea of general revelation and natural theology. “It was especially
Calvin, who interpreted the thoughts of Scripture clearly at this point, when he denied the
indissolubleness of general revelation and natural theology in allowing himself to be
guided by Romans 1.” 36
By virtue of his creation in the image of God man therefore knows God. He cannot
get away from the revelation of God. He knows he is a creature of God. The revelation
about him, conjoined with the revelation through his constitution, cries day and night that
God is the Creator and controller and therefore Redeemer of the universe.
But day and night the sinner seeks to hold back this revelation of God. When Paul on
the Areopagus uses the words “as certain also of your own poets have said,” this cannot
be explained otherwise than in terms of the idea of suppression. “Paul’s words can be
understood only in view of the actual suppression supported by supplanted truth. Paul’s
‘as ... also’ certainly does not mean that their ideas are in agreement with the deepest
intent of Paul’s gospel. He knows the background of their words and does not idealize
them. And yet he quotes their words. This is to be explained only in connection with their
suppression of the truth of God—apostate religion lives antithetically to and in
suppression of God’s truth.” 37
(6) What has been said just now is true of the sinner, the natural man in principle but
not in consummation. Every form of non-Christian religion, of non-Christian philosophy
and science seeks therefore to envelop God in his creation. In principle men turn the true
process of knowledge upside down; they think of God as made in man’s image instead of
thinking of man as made in God’s image. They worship and serve the creature more than
the Creator.
(7) But God continues, in spite of man’s sin, to call men to himself through the works
of his hands. He pours out his good gifts upon the race asking them thereby to be grateful
to the giver of these gifts. The goodness of God is given to men that it might lead them to
repentance. That is the first God-assigned purpose of them. “ ... or despisest thou the
riches of his goodness and forebearance and longsuffering; not knowing that the
goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?” (Rom 2:4). At the same time God threatens
to send punishment upon men for breaking his precepts. “And thinkest thou this, O man,
that judges them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the
judgment of God?” (Rom 2:3). In fine, God continues to deal covenantally with mankind
as a unit.
(8) When looked at from the point of view of the past, this covenantal dealing of God
with man stands as the sign of the favor which God continues to show to man in spite of
his breaking of the covenant. Regarded from the point of view of the future, this covenant
35
 Berkouwer, De Algemeene Openbaring, p. 125.
36
 Idem.
37
 Ibid., p. 116.
dealing stands as the sign of judgment upon those who do not repent and turn unto God
and as a sign of eternal reward of grace for those who do. God gives his good gifts, says
Paul, so that men should repent. But when they fail to repent, their continuance in
disobedience adds to their condemnation. God’s rain and sunshine come upon men first
that they might be “saved.” But when men reject this salvation they add condemnation to
themselves. And since all things happen by the counsel of God’s will, it must finally be
said that even the disobedience of man is a part of the realization of the plan of God. Men
are finally disobedient and retain their covenant-breaking attitude because it was God’s
ultimate purpose that they should do so. To say anything less is to deny the very idea that
God controls whatsoever comes to pass.
After the entrance of sin into the world God’s revelation to man becomes a revelation
of grace and of wrath. It is not that common grace is merely added to revelation; it is
rather that revelation itself becomes characterized by common grace. Man who receives
his life in the first place as a free gift of God now continues to receive it, and the
generosity of nature that goes with it, in spite of his breaking of the covenant. He
continues to receive it though now he has made himself the enemy of God. This is grace.
(9) The sinner’s reaction to this gracious revelation, to this call to repentance, can
never be right in principle unless and until he is redeemed in Christ. Short of this his
basic reaction continues to be that which Berkouwer speaks of as living by the
suppression of that revelation. The sinner may and does turn to God adventitiously but
never in principle. He cannot even suppress the truth without giving witness to the truth
that he suppresses. This is true even of Satan and the lost. They can only love and
practice the lie in opposition to the truth. They know the distinction between good and
evil too. Their rational and moral constitution is still maintained by God. This
maintenance is the presupposition of the nature and eternal endurance of their
punishment.
But until the judgment day the revelation of God to man is a revelation of grace as
well as of wrath, of long suffering endurance as well as of punishment of sinners that
they might come to repentance. So, in addition to knowing truth and the difference
between good and evil, men respond favorably to it in casual fashion. They have a certain
love of the truth, and a certain respect for the good in distinction from evil. They do
works which “for the matter of them” are things which God commands and are “in
themselves praiseworthy and useful.” They do the “civil and moral good.” Without these
“good works” of unregenerate men civilization could not long endure. Not only that, but
through these “good works” unregenerate men contribute to the fulfilling of the original
mandate God gave to mankind in spite of themselves so far as their principle is
concerned.
But to say this, and to say much more that might be said, is not in the least to tone
down the fact that in principle sinners live by the suppression of the truth. They live in
principle by the suppression of truth even as adventitiously they love the truth. They do
despite to the Spirit of truth even as, up to a point, they follow him. Even the truth which
Satan knows but hates, and the righteousness which Satan knows but despises, come
from the Spirit of God as the Spirit of revelation. But Scripture teaches that men in this
world are not finished products of wickedness; they are not satanic or diabolic in the
sense of being consummately wicked in all that they think or do. Due to the irrepressible
character of God’s revelation to them as gracious, they give some measure of reluctant
recognition to God and his truth in this world.
(10) The believer, however, has been changed in principle a covenant keeper. He now
seeks to serve the Creator instead of the creature. He is perfect. He is holy. He is
righteous. He loves the truth and only the truth. He hates the lie and only the lie. John
says he cannot sin.
In practice, however, he daily sins against God. He daily comes short of practicing
truth and righteousness. But he now serves sin and the body of death adventitiously, in
spite of his true self in Jesus Christ. This is what Luther meant when he said of the
Christian that he is simul iustus et peccator (at the same time just and sinful).
(11) We may therefore with Kuyper speak of twofold science and yet also speak of
the unity of science. When Kuyper speaks of twofold science he contrasts the principle of
those whose primary aim is to serve and worship the creature, with the principle of those
whose primary aim is to serve and worship the Creator. He speaks of the principium
naturale and the principium speciale. Creature worshipers seek to live by the natural
principle alone. Those who have no part in the principium speciale do not understand
themselves. “You yourself acknowledge from your own point of view that he who stands
outside does not and cannot understand the actual focus of his own being and
consequently of his reason.” 38 The man of the natural principle will require that the
special principle subject itself to his criterion of truth. On the other hand the idea of the
special principle presupposes that the natural principle has, because of sin, disqualified
itself as a judge of the special principle. “When special revelation presupposes that as a
consequence of sin the principium naturale is distorted, it follows that the principium
naturale has lost its authority to judge.” 39 It is the nature of the special principle that it
cannot submit its claims to a principle that would require its own abdication. Unity of
knowledge, accomplishment of man’s cultural task, accordingly, cannot be obtained by a
compromise of principle between those whose ultimate point of reference is God and
those whose ultimate point of reference is man. It is the nature of a principle, argues
Kuyper, to be the presupposition of all interpretation. A principle is totalitarian in nature.
Two totalitarian principles stand over against one another; no compromise of any sort is
possible between them.
How then can unity of knowledge and of science be accomplished? By the fact that
the special principle is bound to be victorious. By being victorious it saves the natural
principle as created by God. The special principle would not be victorious if it did not
save the natural principle. It is victorious precisely in saving the natural principle. The
believer, as Calvin stresses, is most anxious to explore the works of God. And the
unbeliever, in clinging to his rejection of the special principle, is made tributary to the
service of the special principle. By being made tributary to the special principle he
indirectly contributes to the true development of the natural principle. Those who refuse
to submit the natural principle to the special principle are untrue to the natural principle
itself. Their discoveries of truth in the area of the works of God, therefore, rightly belong
to those who are covenant-keepers in principle. The unity of science is accomplished in
Christ, the Savior of the world.
38
 Kuyper, Encyclopaedie, 2, p. 339.
39
 Ibid., p. 335.
(12) There is in consequence no neutral territory between covenant-keepers and
covenant-breakers. The antitheses of principle is equally real and equally basic at every
point of contact between them. How could it be otherwise? The antithesis is not basic at
any point unless it is basic at every point. The point of battle between two totalitarian
powers may be a spot of desert sand. The battle is not any the less violent for all that. The
fate of the empire is always involved. If one fact were intelligible without the
presupposition of the truth of the special principle, i.e., of Christ as the Savior of the
natural principle, then all facts would be. If the unbeliever could, on his principle,
discover any meaning in one fact in relation to any other fact, in terms of his principle,
then the indispensability of supernatural revelation, and in particular of supernatural
revelation in its redemptive garb, would disappear.
(13) But though no compromise can be made between the two principles, this
constitutes no bar against cooperation between the adherents of these two principles. In a
religious ethical sense, says Kuyper, the unbeliever’s opposition to the special principle
derives from his enmity of God. But this unbeliever need not on that account, as a man of
science, be dishonest. 40 And he has the ability to discover much truth. He can count and
weigh and measure. He can gather facts. His logical powers are often greater than those
of believers. Even to oppose the truth he must set it forth. His interpretative endeavor is
bound to be revelatory of the truth.
Why should the Christian then not gratefully employ, for purposes of advancing
knowledge, the funded results of the investigations of scientists, whether they be
Christians or not? He may do so, if only he does not, while doing it, thereby concede the
autonomy, the juxtaposition of the natural principle as over against the special principle.
(14) This leads us to our final point. The believing scholar will gladly cooperate with
the unbelieving scholar. But the believing scholar cannot excuse himself from the task of
witness-bearing. And this witness-bearing must take place at every point of meeting
between believers and unbelievers. The wisdom of this world has been made foolishness
with God. If the unbelieving scholar’s principle were to be adopted there would be no
truth, no science, no knowledge. Basic to the unbelieving scholar’s position is the notion
of possibility as standing above God. If the unbelieving scholar’s assumption were true,
all would be Chaos and old Night. No fact could then be found. There would be no
distinguishing mark that would differentiate one fact from another fact. Anything might
happen, except that nothing intelligible could happen. The human mind would itself be a
product of chance. Its laws of logic would have no deeper foundation than a derelict
adrift on a shoreless sea. Logic and fact could never come into fruitful union with one
another. The very concepts of “probability” and “proof” would be meaningless.
The unbelieving scholar may at first appear to be very open-minded. But he is too
open-minded. According to him, God, if he exists, may possibly not exist. Christ may,
but he also may not, be the Savior of men. By this “may-or-may-not” of the unbeliever,
the special principle has in effect already been rejected. According to Christianity,
especially according to Christianity as expressed in the Reformed confessions, God is the
source of possibility. The believer cannot allow that justice is done to God and to Christ
unless it be maintained that all hypotheses about facts and their possible and probable
relations must presuppose God and his Christ as self-existent, self-identifying and
40
 Ibid., p. 339.
therewith as the source of the intelligibility and applicability of the idea of fact or of
hypothesis.
The believing scholar, therefore, begs the unbelieving scholar not to forego the fruits
of his own labor. The believer pleads with the unbeliever no longer to rebel against the
truth, which he must, in spite of himself, constantly presuppose. The revelation of God is
clear, it is inescapable. If every fact in the universe, even those facts discovered by the
unbeliever, were not themselves by their nature the condemnation of the principle of
unbelief, they would not be facts at all. There would be no reality to cite against the
unbeliever unless unbelief itself as a parasite must feed upon the truth.
This is not merely to say that if truth should perish it would still be true that it is truth
that perishes, and so truth did not perish after all. It is rather to say that the revelation of
God in the works of God (as interpreted by the principles of the Word of God, and
therefore by the motifs of creation and providence as the carrying out of God’s all-
controlling plan) is clear. By presenting this revelation of God in Christ to men in the
laboratory as well as in the arena of philosophical and theological discussion, the believer
himself manifests the clarity of the natural revelation of God.
2
2
Van Til, Cornelius ; Sigward, Eric H.: The Works of Cornelius Van Til, 1895-1987.
electronic ed. New York : Labels Army Co., 1997
Appendix 2: Berkouwer’s Recent View Of
Scripture
We have made several references to Berkouwer’s view of Scripture. All of these
references were to his earlier work on Scripture under the title The Problem Of Scripture
Criticism. 1 We turn now to a recent work on Scripture by Berkouwer. Its title is Holy
Scripture. 2 This work appeared too late to be included in the body of this pamphlet.
It is of considerable importance for us to compare the later with the earlier work. In
the earlier work Berkouwer lays great stress on the distinctive character of the Reformed
view of Scripture. He speaks of the “isolation” of the Reformed view of Scripture. The
Reformed view of Scripture does full justice to the Reformation principle of sola
Scriptura-sola fide. This is the case because the Reformed view of Scripture involves the
Reformed view of God and his relation to man and his world.
The scriptural teaching that man is a creature made in the image of God is not taken
seriously anywhere else but in the Reformed Faith. And only if man as the subject which
interprets the revelation of God to man, is itself first interpreted by God, can the words of
man be used as “instruments” through which God speaks his Word. Neither the historic
opponents of the Reformed Faith, the Roman Catholics and the Arminians, nor the
current opponents of the Reformed Faith, the neo-orthodox theologians, especially Karl
Barth, interpret man, the receiver of revelation, in terms of the scriptural notion of
creation.
Again, the scriptural teaching that man is a sinner and, as such, hinders the truth in
unrighteousness, is not taken seriously anywhere else but in the Reformed Faith. And
only if sin is seen for what it is, in the light of Scripture, can there be an adequate
appreciation for the necessity, the authority, the clarity and the sufficiency of Scripture.
Neither the historic opponents of the Reformed Faith, the Roman Catholics and the
Arminians, nor the current opponents of the Reformed Faith, the neo-orthodox, especially
Barth, interpret sin in terms of the biblical notion of the fall of man.
In the Council of Trent the Roman Catholic church vigorously declared its adherence
to Scripture as the Word of God. But this declaration, Berkouwer argues, was a merely
formal assertion. By putting tradition on a par with Scripture and by insisting that the
Church had the right and duty of giving a final, and therefore authoritative, interpretation
of Scripture, its confession of the Bible as the Word of God was reduced to a nullity in
practice.
As for Barth, it may appear at first glance that, in rejecting the subjective views of the
Modernists, he has, at the same time, returned to the Reformation view of Scripture. Does
he not say that the Bible is the Word of God? Yes, he does, says Berkouwer; but it should
be carefully noted that this too means nothing more than a formal adherence to the
Reformation principle. This is clear from the fact that according to Barth’s own
explanation the word must be taken activistically. 3 Barth does not believe that we have or
could have available in Scripture a direct and therefore a given revelation of God to man.
1
 Het Probleem der Schriftkritiek, Kok, 1936.
2
 De Heilige Schrift, Kok, Vol. 1, 1966; Vol. 2, 1967.
3
 Cf. Karl Barth, Kirchliche Dogmatik, 1938, p. 592—Berkouwer, p. 33.
For Barth, revelation is historical, but history is never revelational. If we are to escape the
orthodox notion of a book with a once-for-all given revelation of God to man, says Barth,
then we must think of the relation of God to man activistically rather than statically.
This neo-orthodox position with respect to Scripture is, for all its opposition to the
Roman Catholic view of Scripture and for all its opposition to the modern Protestant view
of Scripture, still subjective. The idea of man as not first interpreted by Scripture, but as
first interpreted apart from Scripture in terms of man himself, in short, the idea of human
autonomy, has a spurious and debilitating influence both on Roman Catholicism and on
neo-orthodoxy.
It is of particular importance to note that, according to Berkouwer, the Reformed
view of Scripture and the Reformed view of the teachings of Scripture involve one
another. The “formal” principles and the “material” principle of the Reformation must
always be stated as implying one another. Without the theology of the Reformed
confessions one cannot have the proper doctrine of Scripture.
We may say that the Scripture is what it is because in it Christ tells us who he is and
what he came to do in the world of sinful men. He tells us that he was sent by the Father
in order to save the world (Jn 3:16). He tells us that by his death and resurrection he
saved his people from the “wrath to come” and made them “heirs” with himself of eternal
life in glory. It is by his Spirit that they are born again, born “from above” and brought
into living relation with him through faith.
This is the purpose of his mission. And in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments he tells us of that purpose. He uses men, sinful men, as his mouthpiece. Why
should he not? Should the fact that they are men, and therefore finite, stand in his way?
Not at all. A father can make himself understood to his child. The child will not
exhaustively understand the words of his father, but neither does he need to. Man does
not need to understand the words of his Creator-Redeemer exhaustively to understand
him truly. A father cannot be certain that he has “reached” his son, that he has conveyed
his meaning clearly to his son. The Creator is certain that he does convey his purpose
unmistakably. The created world therefore is what it is because it is revelational of God’s
purpose.
Even by their sin men, as creatures of God, have not been able to destroy the all-
penetrating light of the purpose of God in every fact of the world. Men could not be
sinners except as “breakers” of the ordinances of God. And they could not “break” these
ordinances unless these ordinances were “unbreakable,” i.e., unless they were rebelling
against God within the all-encompassing plan of God.
Accordingly when God freely creates man, freely “permits” him to rebel against him,
and freely comes into the world to redeem him, God can freely chose any man from any
historical situation at any point of history in order to speak through him to all men in any
other historical situation at any other point of history.
Neither the Roman Catholic church nor the neo-orthodox theologian have any such
view of the purpose or scope of God’s revelation of grace to men. In both cases it is their
notion of human autonomy that prevents them from having a philosophy of history in
which man can at no point escape from God. Both Roman Catholicism and neo-
orthodoxy have in effect only a finite God. Their problematics therefore differ from the
problematics of those who hold to the Reformed Faith.
In both cases their problematics have to do with mystery. But the mystery in each
case is different. Those who hold the Reformed Faith take their view of God exclusively
from Scripture. Accordingly their God dwells in light that no man can approach unto. No
man can penetrate the counsels of the self-referential, self-naming God. As a
consequence all the facts of the universe are “mysterious” to man. Man is mysterious to
himself. All the facts of the world are mysterious to man because they are what they are,
in the last analysis, in relation of dependence to God who is not mysterious to himself.
God is light and in him is no darkness at all. Thus for those who believe in God there is
true, though never comprehensive, knowledge. On the other hand, the Roman Catholics
and the neo-orthodox do not take their view of God exclusively from Scripture. The
Roman Catholics first take their view of God and man from “natural theology.” The neo-
orthodox first take their view of God and man from Kant or some other modern
philosopher.
In both cases they assume the autonomy of man. In both cases Christianity is but an
addition to their philosophy.
Thus both the Roman Catholics and the neo-orthodox theologians surround their God
with ultimate mystery. Their God can be of no help to them since he must himself find
his way in a cave. All around him is darkness. All is pure contingency. And man and God
as partners must find their way in this darkness. Fortunately they do not need to find their
way, because neither they nor their God exist. Neither they nor their God can identify
themselves.
Reformed believers also have their problems. For them too omnia abeunt in
mysterium. They too will never “solve” their problems. Even so they have solved their
problems. Their God has solved their problems for them. Their God has no problems.
There are no ideas or laws “above” him, and there are no facts of history “below” him
that have any self-existence and, therefore, restricting power with respect to him. All the
facts and all the laws of the created cosmos are his servants. God is conditioned by
nothing; he is the all-conditioner.
Of course Reformed believers do not seek to prove the existence of their God. To
seek to prove or to disprove the existence of this God would be to seek to deny him. To
seek to prove or disprove this God presupposes that man can identify himself and
discover facts in relation to laws in the universe without reference to God. A God whose
existence is “proved” is not the God of Scripture.
In whatever the Reformed Christian does, as he seeks to obey the cultural mandate
originally given to man, he seeks to implicate himself into a deeper intellectual
understanding and into a more unqualified spiritual commitment to his Creator-
Redeemer.
This means that the Reformed believer seeks to understand the “system” of truth
expressed in Scripture. He will seek truly to grow in the grace and knowledge of his
Savior as he undertakes anew each day to realize something toward the fulfillment of
man’s cultural mandate.
Thus both the Reformed believer, as well as the Roman Catholic and the neo-
orthodox believers, seek to “approximate” truth. But so far as non-Reformed Christians
are self-consciously committed to the idea of human autonomy, they have no truth. Their
approximation to the “truth” is approximation into a vacuum. Then, so far as they are
Christian in their thinking they “share” the problematics of the Reformed Christian. They
have two mutually exclusive sets of problematics. And they commingle these two
mutually exclusive sets of problems. Hence the all-pervasive confusion.
We must now introduce a warning. In what I have given above I have not directly
reproduced the thinking of Berkouwer in detail. I have tried to work out the implications
of his earlier view of Scripture as it related to his earlier view of theology. So much is
clear: Berkouwer’s earlier view of Scripture and of theology were, like the views of such
men as Bavinck and Warfield, involved in one another. Together they expressed the all-
encompassing purpose of the God of all grace to save the whole man with his whole
world.
Such men as are not saved, are not saved because as covenant-breakers they are guilty
before God and abide under God’s wrath. Scripture teaches that the discriminating grace
of God in history is the realization of God’s plan. The self-determinative God is the
ultimate, all-conditioning God. Some men hear, others do not hear the gospel; they never
have the “opportunity” of responding to the overtures of grace. They are lost. Yet they
are not lost without guilt. They are guilty because they hinder the revelation of God that
has been present to them, as to all men, from the beginning of history. Thus the
providence of God is discriminating. God controls the facts of space and time. He
inclines a young man’s heart to become a missionary. As a missionary he goes, because
he is sent, to the dark continent of Africa rather than to Asia. In all this it is, ultimately,
the all-conditioning activity of God that is the final determining factor in the lot of every
man. And it is the self-conditioning God who acts as the final discriminating power upon
all the forces—objective and subjective—that operate in history.
Summing up the matter, we may say that the “earlier Berkouwer” stressed the fact
that though Roman Catholicism and neo-orthodoxy formally confessed adherence to
Scripture as the Word of God, they practically denied this belief by the false
interpretation that they give of the content, the teaching of Scripture. This content can be
expressed by the word purpose or scope. The Reformed believer holds that Christ came
to save the whole man with his world. There is not one spot to be found in the world that
is not under the curse of God because of the sin of man. Man’s entire reaction to the
revelation of God which confronts him everywhere is one of guilt and pollution. So, God
saves the whole man with the whole world. This is the purpose of Christ’s coming into
the world.
According to Roman Catholicism and neo-orthodoxy, the curse of God is not thus
intensive and extensive. The sinner is not insulting God when he asks whether nature
reveals him. The scientist is not guilty when he handles nature as though it were a grab-
bag tossed into his lap by chance instead of the estate of the Creator-Redeemer.
Accordingly, the purpose of Christ’s coming is not to save the whole man and the whole
world. The purpose of Christ is merely to help men in one aspect of their life where they
seem to need some help. This is the “religious” aspect. But even in this aspect of life they
are not entirely helpless. They do not need the regenerating power of the Spirit of Christ
before they can believe.
Thus the purpose of Christ is, at most, a very restricted one. Man does not need the
sovereign grace of God and therefore man does not need the sovereign interpretation of
such a sovereign grace as Scripture claims to give.
The uniqueness of the Reformed view of Scripture is therefore but an expression of
the uniqueness of Reformed theology. And this uniqueness is found in the consistency
with which the sovereign grace of God in Christ is recognized for what it is at every
point.
1. The Later Berkouwer
In his second work on Scripture Berkouwer takes a quite different approach. Not as
though he no longer stresses the necessity of combining one’s view of Scripture and
one’s view of the message of Scripture. On the contrary, he now speaks constantly of the
scope, the purpose, the message of Scripture as involving one’s view of Scripture.
Berkouwer’s new approach appears rather in a change of viewpoint with respect to
the nature of the message or purpose of Scripture. And with a change of view of the
message of Scripture goes a change of view of Scripture itself. Berkouwer’s view of
Scripture is different from what it was in his earlier works because his view of Christ and
his work among men is different from what it was formerly.
We realize that this is a radical judgment. We must not make it lightly. But we are
driven to it by a re-reading of all of Berkouwer’s major works. This judgment is in
essential agreement with that of Dr. Hendrikus Berkhof in his article “The Method of
Berkouwer’s Theology,” in Ex Auditu Verbi. Berkhof argues that Berkouwer’s
theological method, the method of correlation, was bound to lead him, at last, to a virtual
denial of the view of Scripture taken in his earlier work. In the earlier work Berkouwer
starts with the “unproblematic” authority of Scripture as the Word of God. The
“problems” of criticism and of the historical conditions under which Scripture revelation
is given are, as it were, “solved” in advance. They may never be solved in the sense that
they can be “cleared up.” But then it remains true that unless we take our ultimate light
from Scripture, all is darkness.
In his later work, says Berkhof, Berkouwer has seen the tendency toward determinism
in his earlier view of the relation of God to man. To escape this charge of determinism
Berkouwer criticized the Synod of Dordt for using causal categories in its attempt to
safeguard the notion of the sovereignty of the grace of God over against the
Remonstrants. Though their real intent was to stress the doxological character of grace,
the Fathers of Dordt used determinist categories in trying to do so. 4
As Berkouwer now uses ethical or doxological rather than determinist categories in
order to express the notion of sovereign grace, so now he also uses ethical or doxological
rather than causal categories in his defense of the Scriptures as the Word of God.
Berkhof has, we believe, accurately summed up the nature of a general change in
Berkouwer’s theology. We may add to what Berkhof says that this change appears very
strikingly in Berkouwer’s books Providence, and The Election Of God. A true notion of
providence and a true notion of election can be obtained only if we express them in
teleological or doxological instead of causal categories.
It is only in recent times, Berkouwer now argues, that theologians have learned to
interpret the doctrines of grace and with them the doctrine of Scripture in teleological
rather than causal categories. And on this point neo-orthodox theologians have been
4
 A fuller justification of this severe judgment is found in my article, The Relevance of
Dordt.
pioneers. Whereas in an earlier work 5 Berkouwer speaks of Barth as more nominalist
than Occam, in a recent work on Barth he speaks of Barth’s theology as “unambiguously
Christocentric.” 6 Now for Barth, Christ is the Christ-Event. Barth has, he says, actualized
the incarnation. And actualizing the incarnation implies, for Barth, that the states of
Christ, the state of humiliation and the state of exaltation, do not follow one another in
history. Berkouwer recognizes this fact, even in his second book on Barth. He says:
“Barth’s conception of Christ’s humiliation and exaltation does not involve two
successive ‘states’ of Christ, but rather two sides or aspects or forms of what takes place
in Jesus Christ in His effecting of reconciliation between God and man.” 7 It is in
consonance with this when Berkouwer speaks of. Barth’s “supralapsarian” view of
election as being “the reverse side” of Barth’s doctrine of “the ontological impossibility
of sin.” 8 And, “if sin is ontologically impossible, a transition from wrath to grace in the
historical sphere is unthinkable.” 9
Barth’s actualization of the Incarnation involves also the actualization of scriptural
revelation. Therefore when Barth says that the Bible is the Word of God this must be
taken in an activist sense. Thus God is Christ and Christ is his revelation, and his
revelation is reconciliation, and reconciliation is inherently universal. To be sure, Judas
represents the “open situation in preaching.” Nominalism is always correlative to realism.
Contingency is always correlative to determinism. The supralapsarian view of election,
therefore, has nothing to do with determinism. Election has nothing directly to say about
distinctions in the phenomenal world. Election does not distinguish between persons as
they are distinct from one another in the world of space and time. There is no person
named Esau who is “reprobate,” as there is no person named Jacob who is elect. All that
we know is that Christ is the electing God and Christ is the elected man. In the Christ-
Event all of God’s rejection of men has been absorbed. In the Christ, therefore, all men
are saved but, of course, always free to be lost.
All this, Barth admits, involves the rejection of the traditional view of the incarnation,
the traditional view of election, and the traditional view of Scripture. From Barth’s point
of view the traditional view both of Scripture and of the message of Scripture with
respect to the person and work of Christ as reported in Scripture, was expressed in causal
categories. The traditional view of Scripture and of its message is therefore static. It is
metaphysical. It is intellectualist. Its problematics are the problematics of an
impoverished mechanical view taken from the “I-it” dimension of human experience.
Calvinists and Remonstrants fought their battle on the common, mistaken assumption that
God’s revelation of grace is directly discernible in the realm of cause and effect. Neither
expressed their conviction in terms of the existential-ethical dimension, the dimension of
divine-human encounter, the dimension that is above the dimension causal relations.
But now we have learned to be unambiguously Christocentric. We have actualized
the Scriptures and its content. Now we can, for the first time, really state and defend the
primacy of grace. We are now able to do what Calvin, what even the “orthodox Fathers”
5
 Karl Barth, Kok, 1936.
6
 The Triumph Of Grace In The Theology Of Karl Barth, Engl. tr., Eerdmans, p. 17.
7
 p. 133.
8
 p. 256.
9
 p. 233.
really intended to do but could not do, namely: state unproblematically that the words of
men, the oftentimes quite mistaken words of men in Scripture, are the Word of God, and
that the wholly hidden God is wholly revealed in Jesus, and while wholly revealed is still
wholly hidden in him.
We can now, for the first time, escape Docetism both with respect to the person of
Christ and with respect to Scripture.
It is thus that Barth and his neo-orthodox disciples have “solved” the problem of the
relation of a first or primary cause to secondary causes in the case of election as in the
case of providence. At the same time and by the same token Barth and his disciples have
“solved” the problem of the relation of the primary to secondary authors in the case of
Scripture. They have solved it by showing that all such problems disappear as the mist
before the sun the moment we are lifted into the dimension of ethics or doxology.
But we are interested in seeing what bearing all this has on the change in
Berkouwer’s views with respect to Scripture.
The first point to note is that Berkouwer does use an activist framework in his
statement of the doctrine of Scripture. He uses virtually the same terminology that neo-
orthodox theologians use. In an article on Dordt published in 1963 10 he criticizes the
causal framework (kader) in which the doctrine of free grace is expressed by the Synod
of Dordt. The Articles of Dordt, unfortunately, present us with an “objective distinction”
to the effect that God has in time given some men faith and withheld it from others. Such
teaching is not taken from Scripture. It is a “conclusion” which is connected with a vision
of God as causing all things. It is no wonder that men charged Dordt with holding a
determinist view of reality and, in particular, that they charged Dordt with the idea that
the unbelief of men must be traced to an all-causing God. 11
If only we took our doctrine of election from the Scriptures. Then we would, in the
first place, no longer speak of a doctrine of election. Scripture does not present us with “a
doctrine of election but with the free electing God.” 12 And herewith we are above the
realm of causation; we are in the realm of doxology. We are no longer concerned about a
“metaphysical system,” but with the praise of the electing God. The biblical perspective
lifts us out of the determinism-indeterminism antithesis altogether. We no longer employ
a formal idea of the all-powerfulness of God.
It is especially the new or recent exegesis of Scripture that has opened our eyes to the
true teleological character of Scripture itself. The new exegesis of Romans 9–11 has
enabled us to see that the older, objective, causal view of election was mistaken. Esau’s
rejection and Jacob’s election, it is now quite generally recognized, does not indicate that
God has determined everything from eternity with respect to the eventual salvation of
these men as individuals. What the pas sage teaches is simply that salvation is of grace
and not of works. 13 Seeing this, we shall no longer be anxious with respect to the
“number of the predestined.” Nor need we then any longer trouble ourselves about the
relation of an eternal counsel of God and its relation to the movement of time. If only we
10
 Vragen Rondom de Belijdenis in Gereformeerd Theologisch Tydschrift, vol. 63, 1963,
pp. 1–41.
11
 p. 13.
12
 De Verkrezing Gods, Kok, 1955, p. 15.
13
 p. 77.
retain the vision of the doxological nature of the gospel we drop the eternity-time
antithesis as we have already dropped the idea of an all-causing God. If we have once
seen the fact that election is election in Christ, we shall spontaneously give up any
“isolated interest in an all-determining counsel of God, which cannot be followed by a
decisive significance of history.” 14
We briefly interrupt our exposition of Berkouwer’s changed view of theology in order
to bring it into perspective.
In the first place, as already noted, Berkouwer uses, to all intents and purposes, the
same activist framework that neo-orthodox theologians use, in order to set forth the
message of God’s sovereign grace as given in Scripture in modern language.
In the second place, Berkouwer is outspoken in his insistence that it is in this new
activist framework instead of in the framework of orthodox theology that the idea of the
sovereign grace can be set forth adequately. The men of Dordt meant to speak of the
scriptural truth that salvation is all of grace and not at all of merit, but when they spoke
they frequently used a causal framework of language in which the idea of grace cannot be
expressed at all. Worse than that, it is only in spite of such language that the idea of grace
shines through it at all.
Berkouwer sets the dimensions of ethical relation, of sin and salvation, over against
one another in the sharpest possible manner. If the doctrine of grace is to be expressed at
all this must be done doxologically and not causally. Only thus can the charge of
determinism lodged against the Reformed view of the primacy of grace be shown to be
pointless.
If then the contention is made at this point that Berkouwer merely uses the framework
or pattern of language of neo-orthodoxy but is not committed to its thought-content, the
following considerations come into the picture.
Formerly Berkouwer insisted that for all his opposition to liberalism, Barth’s theology
was, nevertheless, subjective. In his latest work on Barth, Berkouwer insists that for all
the serious danger in Barth’s supralapsarianism, Barth maintains the “virgin birth,” “the
historicity of the Resurrection of Christ,” and “the traditional Christological dogma of the
deity and the humanity of Christ.” “What must one think,” asks Berkouwer rhetorically,
“of a characterization of Barth’s theology as ‘new-modernism’ when in that theology are
taught the virgin birth, incarnation, resurrection, and ascension to heaven?” 15
With his activist framework, Barth actualizes the incarnation so that, in Berkouwer’s
words, “it is no longer possible to speak of a process that moves from humiliation to
exaltation,” 16 and yet be said to believe in all of the teachings mentioned in the previous
paragraphs. Is this the price that Berkouwer is willing to pay in order, with Barth, to
escape the “traditional” idea of a “God in himself” and a “man in himself”?
We now follow Berkouwer point by point as he discusses his view of Scripture. First
we turn to:
14
 p. 165.
15
 The Triumph of Grace, p. 16.
16
 p. 314.
2. Volume 1
The Authority of Scripture. When we deal with the question of the authority of
Scripture we must not speak of it as though it were a matter of “timeless contemplation.”
We must not, in our day, in the face of the many questions pertaining to its historically
conditioned terminology simply assert the unproblematic character of inspiration. We
must rather be able to give an account of its nature. 17 There is no such thing as a
“timeless correlation between Scripture and faith.” 18 We must not minimize the “human
factor” in the interest of maintaining the place of priority for the “divine factor.” We must
not stand with Fundamentalists who “obscured the contexts in which God himself has
given Scripture to us.” We must not think of Scripture as a code-book of articles. 19 Such
a position involves a negative apologetic.
The view of Scripture which Berkouwer now calls fundamentalist is said to be a
formal one. It is no longer the Roman Catholics and the neo-orthodox, but it is the
Fundamentalists who are said to hold a formal view of Scripture.
Over against this formal view of Scripture Bavinck already warned us by saying that
Scripture must bind us to Christ. 20 As if the Fundamentalist intended anything else. It is
clear that Berkouwer needs a scape-goat at this point. The American Fundamentalist will
do. Yet Berkhof spoke of Berkouwer’s own view of Scripture as formal. Berkhof is
mistaken. Berkouwer never held to a view of Scripture apart from its message pertaining
to Christ. Neither did Bavinck or many of the Fundamentalists.
Berkouwer’s argument in his first book was to the point. In it he contended that only
he who spurns the idea of seeking wisdom from any source but Scripture has a truly
teleological view of Scripture. Reformed theology comes nearer to this ideal than any
other theology. Roman Catholic and neo-orthodox theology seek their interpretation of
much of life by means of method that presupposes the idea of human autonomy.
However far Reformed theology may be from its goal it is at least trying to make every
thought captive to the obedience of Christ speaking in Scripture.
The real issue today is between those who believe a true teleology, the teleology of
the Christ of the Scriptures, and those who believe in false teleology, a teleology of
human construction. Roman Catholicism seeks a combination between, or synthesis of, a
teleology taken from Aristotle’s philosophy and a teleology taken from the Christ of the
Scripture. Neo-orthodoxy seeks a combination between, or synthesis of, a teleology taken
from Kant and a teleology taken from Scripture. Both of these syntheses are
monstrosities. We shall not deny that one holding to such a monstrosity intellectually is a
Christian at heart. But we are obliged to call upon him to join us in presenting a lost and
dying world with the teleology of Scripture instead of with an Aristotle-Kant teleology
lest all be lost.
17
 p. 7.
18
 p. 15.
19
 p. 26.
20
 p. 36.
3. Volume 2
That Berkouwer is unwilling to make this sort of antithesis is obvious in what he says
about:
A. The Inspiration Of Scripture
In this section Berkouwer actually defends the activist view of Scripture of The
Confession of 1967 against Dr. Edmund P. Clowney, who criticized it from the historic
Reformed point of view. Clowney is said to be reactionary. As noted above, Berkouwer,
knowing full well that Barth’s actualizing of the incarnation involves the complete
rejection of the idea that the resurrection follows his death in time, nevertheless insists
that Barth holds to the “historicity of the resurrection” of Christ.
Similarly, Berkouwer, who once told us to realize that the activist view of Scripture
as held by Barth is the opposite of the Reformed view, now insists that the activist view is
the true view.
He now argues that the activist view of inspiration alone does justice to what some
Reformed traditional theologians were trying to express when they said that the
inspiration of Scripture must be conceived of organically rather than mechanically.
Even though we say that Scripture is inspired organically, many problems remain. We
may profess to hold to an organic view of Scripture without escaping formalism. 21 We
still need to study the nature of Scripture in order to appreciate the true role of the human
subject in relation to it. 22 It is the question of the “way of the Word of God through that
23 24
which is human.” We are after “the true functionality of the human organ.”In doing so, we must be careful not to say that God is the real author of Scripture. Are
then the human authors unreal? One may read many discussions on the question of the
instrumentality of men in connection with the inspiration that bear “a strongly formal
character, which is connected with the causal approach to Scripture.” 25
The men of Dordt held to a causal view of the relation of God to men, and some men
today, presumably among the sons of Dordt, hold to a causal approach to Scripture. So
long as such men still think causally they will remain caught in a “metaphysical
problematic.” They will not see that they are still the victims of a theoretical problematic
which is “entirely alien to Scripture.” 26 Such a “theoretical problematic” is a
“competition problematic.” The men of Dordt, with their causal problematic, could not
properly express their doxological intentions. Today there are those who still think
causally in relation to Scripture. They can never see the true doxology of grace. They can
never properly express the primacy of God’s grace.
The only way of ever learning to express the priority of grace is to speak of Scripture
as witnessing to Christ. The people who wrote The Confession of 1967 have seen this
21
 p. 37.
22
 p. 38.
23
 p. 41.
24
 p. 46.
25
 p. 47.
26
 p. 48.
point. Clowney apparently has no eye for the “mystery” of the Word of God as related to
a “fully human witness.” 27
One would think at this point that Berkouwer now thinks exclusively in terms of the
alternative between a properly activist view of Scripture as witness to Christ and the
formal-causal approach of Fundamentalists and some less progressive sons of Dordt.
Berkhof predicted that, committed as Berkouwer is to his method of correlation, he
would, in the second volume of his new work on Scripture, no longer be able to hold to
his earlier position with respect to the unproblematic character of Scripture. Berkhof’s
prediction has come true.
In the body of this pamphlet we have spoken of Beegle’s work. Beegle, we saw,
wants to adjust his view of Scripture to harmonize with results obtained by studying the
phenomena of Scripture by the empirical method of modern science. The position of
Berkouwer is not just that. Yet there is a similarity between the two views. Berkouwer is
greatly troubled by the historically conditioned character of Scripture, by the limitations
of human language, etc. He knew about the basic elements in these problems when he
wrote his first work on Scripture. Then he saw that Christ was really Lord of history, and
that no phenomena of history, whether directly or indirectly related to Scripture, could
disprove the concrete significance of that Lordship. Now all has changed. If God was
once the source of possibility, now at many points possibility seems to be the source of
God. Mere chance can spout forth all kinds of facts that require a reduced interpretation
of the all-mightiness of God. The idea of God as self-determinate and as being the all-
conditioning, all-directing, power back of history is now said to be a threatening bogey-
man in the way that Barth speaks of the God of Calvin.
B. The Inerrancy Of Scripture
The idea of the inerrancy of Scripture receives the same treatment as the idea of its
inspiration. We are warned against holding to a formal idea of inerrancy which “requires
exact accuracy of all Scriptural presentations.” 28 With such a formal idea of inerrancy we
may fall into the realm of competition with science. Ramm was therefore quite right
when he spoke of the hyperorthodox who fail to see that Scripture comes to us “in terms
of the culture in which the writers wrote.” 29 It is only if we use the idea of the scope of
Scripture that we can work out the idea of the organic nature of inspiration into further
nuances and have a true insight into the “human factor.” Then we shall understand what
Barth means by the worldliness (welthaftigkeit) of revelation. 30
A formal view of the inerrancy of Scripture virtually eliminates the human and the
historical by a direct appeal to the Holy Spirit. A proper teleological view is not worried
about “perfect precision” that would exclude all “interpretative subjectivity.” By the
standard of a formal view of inerrancy “the gospels appear to be untrustworthy.” 31
27
 p. 53.
28
 p. 93.
29
 p. 94.
30
 p. 23.
31
 p. 211.
C. The Perspicuity Of Scripture
Berkouwer devotes much space to the question of the perspicuity of Scripture. There
are, again, those who hold to a formal idea of perspicuity. They think of perspicuity as an
“objective ‘quality’ of Scripture.” 32 There are others who see that the idea of perspicuity
needs to be related to that of interpretation. The Reformers held the latter view. They
meant by the clarity of Scripture the fact that its message actually penetrates the hearts of
men. 33
This is again the position of a true teleology of Scripture. They who hold this true
teleological view of Scripture do not seek to deduce doctrines from Scripture by “good
and necessary consequences” as if from some major premise. 34
D. The Sufficiency Of Scripture
When dealing with the sufficiency of Scripture, Berkouwer again contrasts the
position of those who hold a formal view with the position of those who hold a
teleological view. The former think of the sufficiency of Scripture as of a “lifeless
abstraction” even as they think of its clarity as an “attribute.” The latter realize, with the
Reformers, that the idea of sola Scriptura involves the “stretching out toward the gospel
of salvation as its message” on the part of the believer. 35
If we are to speak to our day on such points as the authority, the clarity and the
sufficiency of Scripture, and on its inspiration, we must go beyond our fathers in that we
must seek to do more justice than they, bound as they were to their causal categories,
could do to the historical conditions in which Scripture was given, and, in particular, to
the “interpreting subject.”
Now neo-orthodox theology does just that. And, to our joy, neo-orthodoxy seeks to
give its rightful place to history in general and to the interpretative subject in particular,
not by falling back into a natural theology but by interpreting both history and man in
terms of the Christ-Event. This mesas that for neo-orthodoxy the causal dimension of
reality is made properly subject to the ethical or doxological dimension. With the help of
an actualized concept of the incarnation and an actualized concept of revelation, we can
now discover and express in proper words the priority of grace over works. Surely this
was the true intent of Dordt and of the Reformers.
We are not suggesting at all that Berkouwer is now ready to go down the line with
Barth’s actualist reinterpretations of Reformation teaching. Berkouwer continues to have
serious objections to certain aspects or points of Barth’s theology And he makes these
serious objections on the basis of the idea of Scripture as the direct revelation of God to
man. In other words, Berkouwer is still using his earlier view of Scripture as a standard
by which alone he can find anything seriously wrong with Barth.
Thus there appears to be great confusion in Berkouwer’s thinking both on the idea of
Scripture and on its contents. He has not altogether given up his earlier position on either
32
 p. 249.
33
 p. 256.
34
 p. 282.
35
 p. 357.
point. The obvious tension present in his thinking seems to spring from the fact that he
was worried about the charge of formalism in relation to his earlier view of Scripture and
was worried about the charge of determinism in relation to his earlier view of election
and of God’s all-controlling providence.
Neo-orthodoxy then appeared attractive as a way of escape. It offered to take one out
of the problematics of history in its relation to God’s plan hack of history in the way that
an airplane takes one over the mountains.
But Barth’s lifting us over the mountains does not mean that we never need to land
again. One can set the ethical dimension over against and above the causal dimension but,
unless one wants to remain in the realm of pure mysticism, one must come down again.
In Kant’s philosophy, ethical dualism is followed by ethical monism. In Barth’s theology,
nominalism is followed by an extreme realism. Barth’s theology may properly be called a
Christo-monism. Man is, in advance (zum vornherein) taken up into the triumphant grace
of Christ. Man is man only as fellow man with Christ, the only true man.
This is the theology that Barth himself sees as the fruit of is Christ-centered
methodology. We can scarcely refute him.
Of particular import is what Berkouwer says about causal thinking. If he had
developed his theology along the lines of his early commitment with respect to Scripture
and of the Christ of Scripture, and along the lines of a scripturally based philosophy of
history, he would have seen that one cannot speak of the cause idea. To speak thus is to
speak formally and abstractly. There is a Christian as there is a non-Christian view of
cause. The meaning of the word cause depends upon the context in which it is used. If set
in the Christian context, causation means merely to give expression to a certain regularity
of relationship that obtains between spatio-temporal facts in terms of the creation and
providence of God. If set in the non-Christian context, causation means that a relation of
regularity somehow, mysteriously, obtains between purely contingent facts. This
regularity may, with the Greeks, be thought of as actually present in the facts between
which it exists or it may, with post-Kantian philosophy, be thought of as a form of
thought in terms of which alone the subject that interprets the facts of a purely contingent
world can make itself believe that there is any order in them at all.
It is, in any case, the would-be autonomous man, using an abstract principle of
continuity and an equally abstract principle of discontinuity that postulates regularity in a
world of chaos.
Berkouwer speaks of a certain imperiousness that marks the causality idea. This is
true in the case of the non-Christian view of cause. In fact, on this non-Christian view
cause is what it is because of the supposedly legislative character of human logic. Reality
must be what man—and his god—by thinking logically, say that it must be. Spinoza gave
best expression to this idea when he said that the order and connection between ideas is
the same as the order and connection between things.
He who thinks along these lines thinks deterministically. And indeterminism is no
cure for determinism. Indeterminism is merely the admission of failure in one’s
interpretation along lines of determinism.
It is Barth who is still caught in this false dilemma between determinism and
indeterminism. The only way to escape it is to set the position that Berkouwer advocated
in his earlier days, the position that starts with the presupposition of the authority, unity,
and clarity of Scripture as the Word of God.
This is not a “causal approach” to Scripture. This is the approach of faith, of faith in
the self-identifying Christ; not faith in faith, or faith in man.
A remark must finally be made about “the negative apologetic” which, Berkouwer
says, is implied in a formal view of Scripture. A positive or proper view of apologetics is,
presumably, involved in a proper or teleological view of Scripture. This point is well
taken.
What does it mean? We believe it means that we must return to Berkouwer’s earlier
view of the isolated character of the Reformed view of Scripture. Only if we return to this
earlier view do we have a true teleology of Scripture. Only if we return to this earlier
view do we have the self-identifying Christ who is the light of the world.
In the English-speaking world the neutral, Arminian method of apologetics reigned
supreme, even in the work of many Reformed theologians. In terms of the method of this
Arminian apologetics, even Reformed theologians compromised their deepest theological
convictions. Thinking biblically they knew it was the sovereign God of creation and
redemption who is the source of what can possibly happen in history. Then, under the
influence of Bishop Butler, they started their apologetic argument with the assumption of
possibility as above God. They lowered their claims for Christ by merely asking that
men, in terms of their autonomous judgment, should elect him commander-in-chief of the
armies of righteousness.
It was like a breath of fresh air when Abraham Kuyper advocated an apologetic in
which the natural man was challenged to capitulate and prostrate himself before the cross
of Christ or lose life and light in all dimensions of life. To be sure, Kuyper sometimes
dropped to a lower level. Bavinck, too, in deep sympathy with Kuyper’s view, was much
influenced by Thomas Aquinas. Even so, both of these men held before us the idea of a
truly biblical apologetic. Holding to the position that a true apologetic presupposes a true,
i.e., a biblical theology, they argued with Calvin that one must presuppose the Bible and
its content in order to approach any problem properly. No problem about any fact of
history, including the problem of the “historically conditioned” character of scriptural
revelation and the problem of the “interpretative subject” in relation to the Scripture, can
be properly stated, let alone solved, except upon the presupposition that the biblical
picture of reality is true.
Since the days of Kuyper and Bavinck, neo-orthodoxy has appeared upon the scene.
It is a theology far more definitely based upon the idea of human autonomy than is that of
Butler. It is clearly imperative, then, that the heirs of Kuyper and Bavinck now set the
historically Reformed view of Scripture and its content sharply over against neo-
orthodoxy. Not to do so clearly is not to set the gospel of the free grace of God clearly
before men as a challenge.
Neo-orthodoxy is a force within the church deceiving many of its members and
ministers into compromise with a man-centered teleology. If its activistic methodology is
accepted its activistic theology is also accepted.
If Berkouwer thinks that an activistic pattern of thinking is a better means of
expressing the doctrines of grace than the traditional one, he would oblige us by showing
how he can, by using his method, avoid slipping into neo-orthodoxy altogether. So far,
every time he uses the activist pattern of thought, his theology also becomes activist.
When Berkouwer is most activist in his thinking he first starts off with causal thinking as
though it were an intelligible way of thinking without the biblical presuppositions of
creation and redemption, then he takes off into the realm of the unspeakable, the realm of
praise without words, in order finally to return and speak of that realm in the language of
causality. In short, so far as Berkouwer uses the activist pattern, he insinuates into the
church a theology based on the idea of the autonomous man, using a Parmenidean-
Spinozistic principle of continuity which would destroy all historical differentiation only
to find that to use this method and not to go off into space, this method must be made
correlative to a principle of discontinuity based on chance.
Thus it appears that if we follow the earlier Berkouwer in his view of Scripture and
theology we have, and if we follow the later Berkouwer in his view of Scripture and its
content we do not have, a positive biblical apologetic. Only if we follow the earlier
Berkouwer as he followed Bavinck and Calvin can we challenge the world with the
wisdom of God and seek to persuade the neo-orthodox theologian to return to the faith of
the Reformers, and with them make their every thought captive to the obedience of
Christ.
