Chapter 6. The Independent Board

THE CONTENTION and the belief that the boards and agencies of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA were, and are, under the control and 
domination of those who do not hold to historic Christianity was a vital 
concern to the Board of Foreign Missions. For many years the 
conservatives of the church were critical and distrustful of the actions 
and missionary appointments of that board. While the other agencies were 
likewise under scrutiny, and in many cases considered even more liberal 
in their operation, it was the Board of Foreign Missions which received 
most of the attention. This may be explained on the ground that foreign 
missions have always been regarded as most intimately concerned with the 
real mission of the church in preaching the gospel of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. An examination of the other boards in a later chapter will 
reveal that what is stated here about the foreign board is equally true 
of the others.

In the fall of 1923, the Rev. Robert Dick Wilson, D.D., LL.D., professor 
of Hebrew and Old Testament literature at Princeton Seminary, wrote an 
article in which he criticized the board on two counts. He averred that 
the board had allowed itself to become entangled with bodies of 
missionaries differing in doctrine and polity from the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, and that missionaries had been hindered from joining 
such a doctrinally sound organization in China as the Bible Union. He 
wrote,

    While believing that it is our duty to give adequate support to the 
missionaries already on the field who are loyal to the doctrine of the 
church, I cannot refrain from stating my conviction that the Board, and 
especially some of our secretaries, have erred grievously in some of 
their policies with regard to the work entrusted to them by the 
church.[1]

In addition to the two causes which Dr. Wilson gave for lack of 
confidence in the board, others felt that the public repudiation by 
three members of the board of the doctrinal deliverances of the 1923 
General Assembly, when they signed the Auburn Affirmation, made that 
board unworthy of the church's support.[2]

At the General Assembly in May, 1924, the agitation against the Board of 
Foreign Missions found expression in the report of the Standing 
Committee on Foreign Missions. The following resolution of the committee 
was adopted:

    That while maintaining loyally the policy established by past 
General Assemblies in repeated enactments with regard to cooperation 
with other Evangelical bodies in our Foreign Missionary Work the Board 
be directed to exercise due care with regard to the Evangelical 
character of all such union and cooperative enterprises, and if there 
should arise in the work of these enterprises a situation in which 
teachings unsound or injurious to the Evangelical Faith are given, the 
Board, as it has declared to be its policy, should either secure the 
correction of such a situation or failing such withdraw from further 
participation.[3]

As far as is known, the board did not withdraw from any union 
enterprises, however questionable they were.

The discontent with the policy of the board increased in extent and 
intensity, and was brought to a climax in 1932 by the publication of a 
book entitled Re-Thinking Missions, which was issued as a report of the 
"Commission of Appraisal of the Laymen's Inquiry after One Hundred 
Years," the chairman of which was Dr. William E. Hocking, professor at 
Harvard University and a leader with strong liberal leanings. The 
minister representative of the Presbyterian Church in the USA was the 
Rev. William P. Merrill, D.D., a signer of the Auburn Affirmation. The 
work of the commission was largely financed by John D. Rockefeller, Jr., 
who had voiced his opposition to historic Christianity.[4]

Representatives of seven denominations—Congregational, Methodist, 
Episcopal, Northern Baptist, Protestant Episcopal, Presbyterian Church 
in the USA, Reformed Church in America, and the United Presbyterian 
Church—met unofficially in New York City in 1930 to consider the foreign 
missions enterprise. This group constituted the thirty-five directors of 
the Foreign Missionary Inquiry, of which seven formed an executive 
committee. The inquiry resulting was independent of the denominational 
mission boards, but it received their cooperation in securing the facts. 
The inquiry was restricted to Burma, China, India, and Japan, and the 
work was divided into two parts; first, an accumulation of data, and 
secondly, "an appraisal of these facts in the light of the widest 
possible consideration of the meaning of the mission enterprises and of 
the world condition in which it is now, and is to be, carried out."[5]

The Institute of Social and Religious Research was engaged to gather the 
data and research workers were sent to the designated fields for this 
purpose. In September, 1931, this part of the report was completed and 
the facts were placed in the hands of the Commission of Appraisal of 
fifteen members. These commissioners made a visit to the several mission 
fields with the following purpose in mind:

    To aid laymen to determine their attitude toward Foreign Missions, 
by reconsidering the functions of such Missions in the world today. With 
this general aim,

    a. To make an objective appraisal of their activities in the fields 
visited;

    b. To observe the effect of Missions on the life of the peoples of 
the Orient;

    c. In the light of the existing conditions and profiting, though not 
bound, by missionary experience to work out a practical program for 
today, offering recommendations as to the extent to which missionary 
activities of every sort should be continued or changed.[6]

In September, 1932, seven volumes were issued by the commission 
containing the data gathered concerning the various aspects of the 
foreign missions enterprise and also the book, Re-Thinking Missions, 
which summarized the facts according to the foregoing expressed purpose. 
The last named book is of the most importance and contains three parts: 
I. General Principles, chapters 1-4; II. Aspects of Mission Work, 
chapters 5-12; III. Administration, chapters 12-14.

The parts of the book which have to do with personnel and methods are 
not so important to this study, but the recommendations of this 
commission with reference to the approach of Christianity to the other 
religions, and the message which missionaries should preach, are of the 
utmost concern in this study. The commission makes it plain that 
Christianity should unite with the other religions, Islam, Hinduism, or 
Buddhism, in a common front against materialism, naturalism, and 
immorality.

    It is no longer, which prophet? or which book.? It is whether any 
prophet, book, revelation, rite, Church is to be trusted. All the old 
oracles are seeing a new sign: the scorn on the faces of students who 
know the experiments in anti-religion in Russia and non-religion in 
Turkey, and the actual religionlessness of much western life.... The 
case that must now be stated is the case for any religion at all.[7]

    ... Thus it is that Christianity finds itself in point of fact 
aligned in this world-wide issue with the non-Christian faiths of 
Asia.... There are thus several factors conspiring to one end: namely, 
the necessity that the modern mission make a positive effort, first of 
all to know and understand the religions around it, then to recognize 
and associate itself with whatever kindred elements there are in 
them.[8]

There is no need to multiply these quotations because the whole attitude 
of the book is predicated upon the assumption that the germ of truth 
exists in all religions and that it is the duty of the missionary to 
recognize that germ of truth as the least common denominator and build 
thereupon.

In regard to the message of the missionary it is stated,

    The original objective of the mission might be stated as the 
conquest of the world by Christianity: it was a world benevolence 
conceived in terms of a world campaign. There was one way of salvation 
and one only, one name, one atonement. this plan with its particular 
historical center in the career of Jesus must become the point of regard 
for every human soul. The universal quality of Christianity lay not 
alone in its valid principles of truth and morals, but in an essential 
paradox, the universal claim of one historical fact: the work of 
Christ.... Hence, in respect to its central fact Christianity was 
necessarily dogmatic—it could only say Ecce Homo, Behold the Man; and it 
was committed to a certain intolerance, beneficent in purpose—in the 
interest of the soul it could allow no substitute for Christ.[9]

Concerning this point of view, the following hope was expressed, "In 
that case, the hope would be that Christianity, instead of tying itself 
to the sinking bulks, would hold itself clear and give a distinctive 
version of what religion, in its purity, may mean.[10]

It is very plain from these quotations that the modernist message of 
missions is entirely different from that of historic Christianity. 
According to historic Christianity a missionary is not to make common 
cause with pagan religions, but to show these religionists the error of 
their ways and to point them to the one way of salvation through Jesus 
Christ. This was the method and the message of the apostles and has been 
for the Christian church these many centuries. In other words, the 
recommendations of the commission would mean a radical departure for the 
mission enterprise.

Since the commission and its report had received such wide newspaper 
comment, the publication of Re-Thinking Missions focused the attention 
of the Christian world upon foreign missions and demonstrated anew that 
drastic changes in missionary work and in the missionary message were 
taking place within the Protestant church. Ministers and organizations 
in practically every Protestant church made some mention of the report. 
In fact, it was the issuance of this book, as well as the presence of 
Pearl S. Buck on the foreign missionary roster of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, which crystallized the thoughts of Dr. Machen on 
foreign missions as they were related to the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA.

This Pearl S. Buck was no obscure missionary in a forgotten part of the 
world, but one of the most prominent and successful novelists of the day 
who lived in China and was associated with Nanking University. What 
makes the situation more reprehensible from the standpoint of the Board 
of Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian Church in the USA is the fact 
that Dr. Robert E. Speer, senior secretary of the board, was president 
of the board of founders of Nanking University. In fact, Dr. Speer's 
attitude was a source of amazement to Christian leaders.[11]

The manifest indifference of the board toward Pearl Buck's unbelief and 
the compromising attitude of the board toward Re-Thinking Missions 
produced the conviction that the time to take drastic action had come. 
Dr. Machen felt compelled to make public his opinion to the New 
Brunswick Presbytery of which he was a member. This he did in the form 
of an overture.

    I am presenting this Overture not because I desire to do so but 
because I am compelled to do so. I should be far happier if I did not 
know certain things about the Board of Foreign Missions of the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.; but I do know those things, and the 
knowledge of them places upon me a duty which I cannot evade. My 
membership in a Presbytery seems to me to be a sacred trust, and it is 
in discharge of the obligations of that trust that I am presenting the 
proposed Overture and some of the reasons which have compelled me to 
advocate it.[12]

The overture was presented to the presbytery at its meeting on January 
24, 1933, and made the order of the day for April 11, 1933. Dr. Robert 
E. Speer was invited to be present as the representative spokesman for 
the Board of Foreign Missions. The overture called for care on the part 
of the board to keep modernists from the board and the roll of 
missionaries, and to avoid doctrinally compromising union 
enterprises.[13]

Dr. Machen's argument in favor of the overture was printed in a 110-page 
pamphlet entitled, Modernism and the Board of Foreign Missions of the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., and sent, before the meeting, to 
every minister and elder in the presbytery as well as to every member 
and secretary of the Board of Foreign Missions.

The drama and meaning of that day will remain long in the memory of 
those who were present to hear the debate. Before that large audience in 
the Fourth Presbyterian Church in Trenton, New Jersey, appeared two men, 
one the outstanding conservative theologian of America and the other the 
missionary leader of American Presbyterianism.

It was more than a conflict between two brilliant men set for an 
academic debate and verbal pyrotechnics for the entertainment and 
intellectual stimulation of the audience. It was even more than the 
clash of two opponents each ready to prove that his presentation of the 
case was right. In reality, it was a dramatic meeting in which two 
conceptions of Christianity were presented by two of the ablest men in 
the Christian world, one the historic orthodox point of view and the 
other the doctrinally indifferent attitude. One stood for a militant 
defense of the gospel and the other advocated a pacifistic view toward 
those ministers and missionaries of the church who were modernistic in 
their theology. The final outcome of the struggle in the church warrants 
the claim that this debate was one of real historic significance, and 
one that has had an influence on individuals and churches wherever the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA is represented both in America and 
abroad.

At the very outset Dr. Machen made it plain that his sole standard of 
judgment was the Word of God, and that every missionary, every 
institution, and every piece of literature supported and endorsed by the 
board must be tested and judged by adherence to the Bible. There are 
many standards of judgment, he said, but the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA has stated in its Confession of Faith, "The Supreme Judge, by whom 
all controversies of religion are to be determined, ... and in whose 
sentence we are to rest, can be no other but the Holy Spirit speaking in 
the Scripture."[14]

With these preliminary remarks he plunged into the main stream of his 
argument and mentioned briefly the evidences of modernism in the Board 
of Foreign Missions contained in his pamphlet. Only one hour was allowed 
for the presentation of these facts, but the pamphlet had been sent to 
the presbyters well in advance of the meeting, so that the supporting 
evidence for his address was known to everyone present.

The moral earnestness, the dignity, and the tender appeal with which Dr. 
Machen closed his argument brought a hushed silence over the audience. 
He pled with them to return to the Word of God, to forsake the wisdom of 
man, to turn against the trend of the age, and to be faithful to the 
Christ of the Bible.

The main thesis of Dr. Machen's charges against the Board of Foreign 
Missions as stated in his pamphlet was that the board had become so 
entangled with modernism that the need for reform was imperative. He 
proceeded to prove this contention by making six charges against the 
board, all substantiated by evidence.

His first complaint had to do with the attitude of the Board of Foreign 
Missions toward the book Re-Thinking Missions. The board issued an 
official "Action of the Board of Foreign Missions," passed on November 
21, 1932, and published in pamphlet form as well as in the Presbyterian 
Magazine, January, 1933. In this statement the board made no clear-cut 
pronouncement against the appraisal commission's report, which had made 
"an attack against the very heart of the Christian religion."[15] Mr. 
James M. Speers and Mrs. John H. Finley were members of the Board of 
Foreign Missions, and at the same time members of the Laymen's Foreign 
Missions Inquiry. Dr. Machen asked the question,

    Did it [the Board] agree with its Vice-President, Mr. Speers, and 
another of its members, Mrs. Finley, in their action in issuing the 
Appraisal Commission's Report, or did it repudiate this action of these 
two of its members, and pronounce the Report of the Appraisal Commission 
as being, what it clearly is, hostile to the roots of the Christian 
religion?

Dr. Machen answered his own question: "It made no answer to these 
inquiries. It dodged the issue."[16] The statement of the board relative 
to the aim of missions reads,

    The supreme and controlling aim of Foreign Missions is to make the 
Lord Jesus Christ known to all men as their Divine Saviour and to 
persuade them to become His disciples; to gather these disciples into 
Christian Churches which shall be self-propagating, self-supporting, 
self-governing; to cooperate, so long as necessary, with these Churches 
in the evangelizing of their countrymen and in bringing to bear on all 
human life the spirit and principles of Christ.[17]

In reply to this Dr. Machen said,

    Where is there any reference here to the things really distinctive 
of Christian missions, where is there, at least, any reference to such 
things in terms which are not often distorted by modern unbelief to mean 
something entirely different from what they used to mean?[18]

The second charge of modernism against the board concerned its 
vacillating attitude toward Pearl S. Buck, the author of The Good Earth. 
Dr. Machen quoted largely from two articles by Mrs. Buck, "The Laymen's 
Mission Report," and "Is There a Case for Foreign Missions?" Dr. 
Machen's quotations from her articles very plainly show outspoken 
opposition to historic Christianity:

    The first three chapters [Re-Thinking Missions] are the finest 
exposition of religion I have ever read.[19]

    To some of us He is still the divine son of God, born of the virgin 
Mary, conceived by the Holy Spirit. But to many of us He has ceased to 
be that... I do not believe in original sin.... I agree with the Chinese 
who feel their people should be protected from such superstition 
(Biblical teaching about salvation from sin).[20]

Such statements are so obviously opposed to historic Christianity that 
Dr. Machen hardly felt called upon to answer them.

When Dr. Machen first made these damaging charges against the board for 
allowing Mrs. Buck to remain as a missionary, the board had done nothing 
about it. At a later date, Mrs. Buck resigned as a missionary and the 
board accepted her resignation "with regret." The minute of the board 
reads,

    A letter was presented from Mrs. J. Lossing Buck, of the Kiangan 
Mission, requesting to be released from responsible relationship to the 
Board. The Board had hoped that this step might be avoided, but in view 
of all the considerations involved and with deep regret it voted to 
acquiesce in her request. The Board expressed to Mrs. Buck its sincere 
appreciation of the service which she has rendered during the past 
sixteen years and its earnest prayer that her unusual abilities may 
continue to be richly used in behalf of the people of China.

On May 31, 1934, Dr. Robert E. Speer in writing to the Rev. Carl 
McIntire stated,

    The Board did accept Mrs. Buck's resignation with regret... Its 
regret in Mrs. Buck's case was because she was unable any longer to hold 
and proclaim the Christian faith as she had held it on her first 
appointment by the Southern Presbyterian Church as a missionary to China 
and her appointment as a missionary of our Church when she married Mr. 
Buck.[21]

Dr. Speer's answer seems rather strange, particularly when it is 
recalled that he had been president of the board of founders of Nanking 
University with which Mrs. Buck had been associated for many years, and 
must have known her attitude. Furthermore, on the face of the matter 
surely no one would possibly interpret the action as Dr. Speer 
interprets it.

Dr. Machen's third accusation concerned the board and its attitude 
toward the Auburn Affirmation. He made it clear that one of the most 
important officers of the board, the candidate secretary, Rev. Lindsay 
S. B. Hadley, was a signer of the Auburn Affirmation. Dr. Machen wrote,

    To the Candidate Secretary is entrusted the delicate task of 
interviewing candidates for the foreign field and of encouraging or 
discouraging them in their high ambition. Is there any agent of the 
Church who ought to be more completely clear as to what the Church's 
message is than the occupant of this position?[22]

In 1926, Dr. Machen had written to the board asking for an explanation 
of the presence of five signers of the Auburn Affirmation on the board. 
In reply Dr. Speer wrote, "We know of not one who does not accept the 
Constitution and Standards of the Church and who is not truly and 
loyally evangelical."[23] At the time that this letter was written there 
were five out of fifteen members of the board who were signers of the 
Auburn Affirmation. To such a state of affairs Dr. Machen made the 
reply, "It must be said very plainly that Bible-believing Christians can 
have no confidence in a Board whose standards of what is truly and 
loyally evangelical are such as that."[24]

The fourth count against the board concerned the modernist propaganda by 
the candidate department. This department recommended such books as The 
Meaning of Faith, by Harry Emerson Fosdick, The Marks of a World 
Christian, by D. J. Fleming, and The Devotional Diary, by J. H. Oldham. 
Dr. Machen examined these books and, judging by the standards of the 
Bible, he found them to be contrary to historic Christianity. As a 
matter of fact, the Rev. Harry Emerson Fosdick, D.D., is regarded as one 
of the most outstanding modernist ministers in the bounds of the 
nominally Christian church. The other two authors are not as well-known, 
but their books which were there recommended are as offensive to the 
gospel of the Bible as the book of Dr. Fosdick.

Dr. Machen's fifth charge against the board was its commendation of such 
men as Sherwood Eddy and Kagawa. Dr. Machen made it clear that the 
teachings of Sherwood Eddy and Kagawa strike at the very heart of the 
Christian message as understood by the church for these many centuries.

The last indictment of the board was concerned with the fact that the 
board cooperates with modernist union enterprises in China. For evidence 
in this respect Dr. Machen depended upon communications from Dr. Albert 
B. Dodd of the North China Theological Seminary, a missionary of the 
church, and Chancellor Arie Kok of the Netherlands legation in Peiping. 
The citations of modernist propaganda and cooperation with modernist 
union enterprises in China of the board are overwhelming.

It is difficult to understand how one could read this pamphlet or have 
heard Dr. Machen and not come to the conclusion that the Board of 
Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian Church in the USA had been 
unfaithful to its trust.

Dr. Robert E. Speer spoke after Dr. Machen, but in no way was his 
address an answer to the charges in the pamphlet which had been sent to 
him well in advance of the meeting. In the main he said that the board 
was a servant of the church and, as such, it was up to the general 
assembly to take whatever actions were necessary to remedy a bad 
situation if that obtained. Dr. Speer defended the actions of the board 
and its missionaries and declared that these men were as faithful to the 
Bible as the men at home. This latter statement no one would deny, since 
the ministers of the church at home were probably less true to the 
Bible. Instead of replying to the charges in the pamphlet, Dr. Speer did 
attempt to answer the four parts of the overture which Dr. Machen had 
introduced. Concerning section one, he stated that it singled out the 
Board of Foreign Missions and so was discriminatory. Section two he 
declared was out of order because the board had no authority to sit in 
judgment upon a minister who was in good and regular standing. Dr. Speer 
could not deny that the candidate secretary was a signer of the Auburn 
Affirmation. Relative to section three, he stated that the question 
blanks which were sent by the board to prospective candidates in no way 
indicated that a tolerance for opposing views was essential to a 
missionary's attitude. The last paragraph of the overture refers to the 
dangers which lurk in union enterprises and the necessity for constant 
vigilance. This Dr. Speer admitted, but he also made it clear that there 
is danger in separation.

The Presbytery of New Brunswick voted overwhelmingly against Dr. 
Machen's overture, but this did not stop the questions and doubts which 
the pamphlet had created in the minds of Presbyterians everywhere. On 
May 1, 1933, the Presbytery of Philadelphia passed the identical 
overture so that the whole matter thus forced itself upon the attention 
of the General Assembly.[25]

When the General Assembly met in Columbus, Ohio, on May 25, 1933, the 
issue which overshadowed all other items on the docket was the overture 
from the Presbytery of Philadelphia, which was concurred in by the 
Presbytery of Aberdeen, and other overtures of a similar nature from 
Hudson, Chester, and Northumberland Presbyteries concerning the Board of 
Foreign Missions and its alleged unfaithfulness to the doctrinal 
standards of the church.[26] Since the boards of the church are the 
creation of the general assembly, this was the proper procedure for 
attempting to remedy a bad situation in any board.

The utter weakness of the Board of Foreign Missions' answer to the 
allegations in the overture was seen by the tactics of those who chose 
to "whitewash" the activities of the board, and so demonstrate their 
loyalty to it. Every conceivable parliamentary trick was used to stifle 
debate and to stir the emotions of the commissioners to loyalty to the 
boards of the church. In the midst of the majority report of the 
Assembly's Committee on Foreign Missions, for example, the memorial roll 
of missionaries was read, a prayer was made, and then the whole assembly 
sang, "For All the Saints Who from Their Labors Rest," thus prejudicing 
the assembly in favor of the report. This show of bad taste in the midst 
of a controversial issue was evidently done to put the majority report 
in a good light. Another demonstration of prejudice and bad taste was 
the introduction which Dr. McDowell, the moderator, gave to Dr. Speer 
when he said, "Dr. Speer... of whom it could be said, as it was said of 
his Master, 'In him was life and the life was the light of men.' "[27]

The majority report of the assembly's Committee on Foreign Missions 
occupied practically all of the time allotted to the subject in 
extolling the virtues and accomplishments of the board.[28] Those who 
represented the minority on this committee, Peter Stam, Jr., an elder 
from Narberth, Pennsylvania, and the Rev. Robert S. Marsden, of 
Middletown, Pennsylvania, wished to speak in behalf of the overture, but 
were allotted a sum total of fifteen minutes. The usual courtesy of 
printing the minority report was denied. The minority made the following 
recommendations:

    Therefore, in answer to the overtures from the Presbyteries of 
Philadelphia and Aberdeen, and in reply to the other overtures, papers 
and memorials, the Committee recommends that the following resolution be 
adopted by this Assembly:

    "The 145th General Assembly has learned with sorrow of the acts and 
policies of its Board of Foreign Missions which have seriously impaired 
confidence in the minds of thousands of loyal and earnest Presbyterians. 
This Assembly proclaims anew its loyalty and love for the pure and 
everlasting gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, declaring to men everywhere 
that there is only one way of salvation—through the substitutionary, 
atoning sacrifice of Christ upon the cross, where He shed His precious 
blood for the redemption of lost and sinful men. The Assembly pledges 
that the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. will, through its Board of 
Foreign Missions, preach this one, only gospel to the uttermost parts of 
the earth, to the exclusion of all other gospels or false paths to God."

    In order to take the first practical step to make this pledge 
effective and thus to reestablish confidence the Committee nominates the 
following persons to serve for three years as members of the Board of 
the Class of 1933-1936:...

    (Signed)
    Peter Stam, Jr.
    Robert S. Marsden

Dr. Machen appeared before the Assembly's Standing Committee on Foreign 
Missions to defend his charges against the board, but the members of the 
committee were so obviously prejudiced that he made little impression 
upon them.

The majority report was overwhelmingly adopted, and the attempt to 
reform the Board of Foreign Missions in the most effective way according 
to Presbyterian procedure had failed completely. There was nothing left 
to do but to announce the formation of an independent organization 
operating outside the bounds of the church, and separate from the 
church, which would carry on truly biblical and truly Presbyterian 
foreign missions. The conservatives who had attempted to bring about a 
reform in the Board of Foreign Missions were determined to have a 
foreign mission agency which would be true to the Bible. While still at 
Columbus, Ohio, Dr. Machen and the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths, both of 
whom had been leaders in the reform movement, issued the following 
statement:

    In view of the action of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A. resisting the movement for reform of the Board of 
Foreign Missions, a new Board will be organized by Bible-believing 
Christians to promote truly Biblical and truly Presbyterian mission 
work.[29]

On June 27, 1933, the Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign 
Missions was formally organized and on October 17, 1933, the 
constitution was adopted and the following officers elected: the Rev. J. 
Gresham Machen, president, the Rev. Merrill T. MacPherson, 
vice-president, the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths, secretary, and Murray 
Forst Thompson, treasurer. The board also issued an invitation to the 
Rev. Charles J. Woodbridge, a missionary of the church in the French 
Cameroun, West Africa, to serve as general secretary.[30]

The Rev. Charles J. Woodbridge returned to this country and began 
serving as general secretary in February, 1934. He accepted the 
responsibility because he was convinced that the old board was no longer 
faithful to its trust, and that an independent board which would be 
truly biblical and truly Presbyterian would have to be established.

With the coming of Mr. Woodbridge the Independent Board began to extend 
its influence and activities. Mr. Woodbridge, whose father had been for 
over forty years an honored missionary of the Presbyterian Church in the 
US in China, was no ordinary general secretary, but a man of exceptional 
personality and evangelistic appeal. As a result of his work, funds were 
contributed to the board with such liberality that within two months 
after his arrival, the Rev. and Mrs. Henry W. Coray were appointed in 
April, 1934, as the first missionaries of the board to be stationed in 
China.[31]

Dissatisfaction with the policy of the Board of Foreign Missions, 
however, was not confined to Philadelphia nor to Dr. Machen. The 
Presbytery of Chester sent a statement to the board on January 23, 1934, 
part of which is as follows:

    1. ...Rightly or wrongly, the feeling prevails in many quarters that 
our Board has spoken feebly when the occasion demanded a thunder tone.

    2. The Board's Candidate Department, so influential in determining 
the character of the reinforcements sent to the field, should be above 
suspicion in the matter of its loyalty to the doctrinal standards of our 
church....

    3. We believe that there is an urgent need of improvement in mission 
study books recommended to our people....

    4. The conviction prevails among many that the nature of some of the 
educational work in which our Board has a share is of questionable 
value.[32]

The board's reply to Chester Presbytery gave no new light on the 
accusations which had been leveled at it by Dr. Machen and others.

In April, 1935, the Rev. Carl McIntire, pastor of the Presbyterian 
Church in Collingswood, New Jersey, published a 96-page pamphlet 
entitled Dr. Robert E. Speer, the Board of Foreign Missions of the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. and Modernism, in which he gave 
additional proof of modernism in the Board of Foreign Missions along the 
same lines as Dr. Machen, that is, concerning the literature, 
missionaries, members of the board, and union enterprises of the board. 
Dr. Speer's reply to these charges was included in Mr. McIntire's 
booklet, but in most of the instances he denied the charges of modernism 
and "whitewashed" the board entirely.

Another indictment of the Board of Foreign Missions was made by the Rev. 
Donald G. Barnhouse, D.D., pastor of the Tenth Presbyterian Church in 
Philadelphia, who had made a sixteen months' tour of some of the mission 
fields of the church. In his report of this tour Dr. Barnhouse charged 
that modernism was to be found among some of the missionaries and in 
some of the missionary enterprises.[33] But his conclusions differed 
greatly from Dr. Machen's in that he advocated that the church give to 
the board, especially to its sound missionaries, and urged further that 
the church try to elect more members to the board who would be loyal to 
the standards of the church. Although Dr. Barnhouse's conclusions were 
weak and futile, nevertheless his testimony to modernism in the Board of 
Foreign Missions added to the weight of the evidence against the board.

In addition to these rather formal protests against modernism in the 
Board of Foreign Missions, many articles continued to be written and 
overtures sent to the General Assembly as late as 1935, two years after 
the Independent Board had been organized.

A strong indictment was delivered in an address by Dr. Charles G. 
Trumbull, editor of The Sunday School Times, at a mass meeting called by 
Presbyterian laymen in Philadelphia, February 28, 1935. Under the title, 
"Foreign Missionary Betrayals of the Faith," Dr. Trumbull asked the 
question, "What are the policies and practices of our Board of Foreign 
Missions that are undermining the work of the sound evangelical 
missionaries in the foreign field? They are the policies and practises 
of Modernism." He then listed some of those policies and practices as 
evidenced by members of the board itself, by missionaries, by union 
enterprises, by the literature issued by the board, and concluded his 
address by saying, "How can unfaithful Board members and unfaithful 
Board secretaries be expected to deal properly with unfaithful 
missionaries?"[34]

Protests and communications relative to modernism were also sent to the 
Board of Foreign Missions so that the discontent with the board mounted 
higher and higher. In the meantime, the power and influence of the 
Independent Board grew as each month saw more converts to its cause. 
This alarming situation frightened the leaders of the ecclesiastical 
organization of the church to such an extent that unprecedented and 
drastic action was decided upon. The General Assembly meeting in 
Cleveland, Ohio, May, 1934, was to witness the awful tragedy of the 
issuance of a deliverance which was to cause those who were most loyal 
to the Bible to resign, and so to deprive the church of a group who had 
been zealous in maintaining the truths of the gospel. The rulers of the 
church knew no bounds in their determination to rid the church of the 
so-called disturbers of the peace.
