Chapter 5. Union Movements

MANY ATTEMPTS at organic union between the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA and other church bodies have been made, three of which have already 
been discussed, but so far only three unions, one with the Associate 
Synod in 1822, one with the Cumberland Presbyterian Church in 1906, and 
one with the Welsh Calvinistic Methodist Church in 1920, have been 
consummated. Friendly correspondence has been maintained with several 
churches of the Reformed persuasion, but in most instances little 
progress has been made toward actual union.

In 1903 the General Assembly adopted the following vague resolution 
concerning relationships with other churches:

    The Presbyterian Church holds Christian fellowship with all who 
confess and obey Jesus Christ as their Divine Saviour and Lord, and 
acknowledges the duty of all Churches that recognize Him, as the only 
Head of the Church universal, to work together in harmony and love, for 
the extension of His kingdom and the good of the world; and this 
Assembly earnestly desires to commend and promote this Christian 
cooperation, and also practically to advance the cause of Church union 
by confederation, and, where possible, by consolidation among the 
Churches of the Reformed Faith, which are most nearly akin in doctrine 
and organization.[1]

Three movements in particular require detailed consideration because 
they have occupied the attention of the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
for many years, and because they represent serious possibilities for 
organic union. These attempts also show the doctrinal laxity in the 
church and its growing indifference to doctrine.

In 1907 the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
received overtures from 113 presbyteries requesting that action be taken 
with a view to effecting organic union with the United Presbyterian 
Church of North America.[2] From that date on, friendly correspondence 
with the United Presbyterian Church continued, with overtures for union 
emanating from both bodies. But it was not until 1930, when the General 
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA received the following 
message from the committee on correspondence of the United Presbyterian 
General Assembly, "United Presbyterian General Assembly by practically 
unanimous vote adopted report of Committee on Presbyterian Unity 
authorizing committee to begin conferences with committees of other 
Presbyterian and Reformed Churches on plans for Organic Union,"[3] that 
the movement for union became a definite possibility.

The Department of Church Cooperation and Union under the chairmanship of 
the Rev. J. Ross Stevenson, D.D., then president of Princeton 
Theological Seminary and the chief protagonist of church union in the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, was authorized to enter into 
negotiations with other Presbyterian and Reformed churches in order to 
complete plans or a plan for organic union with any one or all of these 
bodies.[4] The United Presbyterian Church was the most receptive, so 
that several meetings between committees of the two churches were held. 
In 1932 a Plan of Union was presented to both general assemblies. The 
name proposed for the united church was "The Presbyterian Church of 
America." A pamphlet entitled, "Documents Relating to the Proposed 
Organic Union of the Presbyterian Church in the USA and the United 
Presbyterian Church of North America," was issued by the Joint Committee 
on Organic Union and widely distributed among the ministers of both 
churches. This pamphlet included the doctrinal basis for the union as 
well as the provisional form of government, book of discipline, and 
directory for worship.

Much criticism was centered about the doctrinal basis of the union, 
especially the confessional statement of 1925 of the United Presbyterian 
Church and the brief statement of the Reformed faith adopted by the 1902 
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, both of which 
were included in the doctrinal basis. The strong objections to these 
statements, on the ground that they toned down the Calvinism of the 
Westminster Confession of Faith, compelled the joint committee to 
include these in the Plan of Union only as "historical interpretative 
statements." The Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments were to be 
regarded as the supreme standard, the only infallible rule of faith and 
practice. The subordinate standards were to be the Westminster 
Confession of Faith, together with the amendments adopted in 1903 by the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, and the Larger and Shorter Catechisms, 
all of which were recognized as agreeable to and founded upon the 
Scripture.[5]

Dr. J. Gresham Machen assumed a leading role in opposition to this 
proposed Plan of Union. He voiced no objection to a union between the 
two churches as such because they represented a common Reformed 
tradition, but he was against this proposed union for several 
reasons.[6]

First, he contended that the proposed form of government for union 
practically destroyed the rights of the local congregation. The Plan of 
Union made it possible for a presbytery to take over the affairs of a 
local church without any judicial process and use the resources and 
holdings of the local congregation contrary to its desires.[7]

Secondly, the Plan of Union made giving a tax and not a matter of 
free-will.

    If any person of known pecuniary ability fails in giving of his 
substance, the session should point out his obligation as revealed in 
the Word of God and the blessing attending its faithful discharge. If he 
still withhold from the treasury of the Lord, the session may deal with 
him as an offender.[8]

But a real central objection by Dr. Machen concerned the 1925 
confessional statement of the United Presbyterian Church, even though it 
was to be regarded only as an "historical interpretative statement." He 
argued that although the Westminster Confession of Faith, the Larger and 
Shorter Catechisms, subject to the holy Scriptures, are to be the final 
authority in matters of doctrine,[9] a document like the "1925 
Confessional Statement" actually interprets away the purport of the 
Westminster Confession of Faith and so destroys its original meaning. 
For example, the confessional statement maintains that the holy 
Scriptures are "an infallible rule of faith and practice and the supreme 
source of authority in spiritual truth."[10] This article, he contended, 
makes a false distinction between historical truth and spiritual truth 
and so gives comfort to the central error of the day. On the other hand, 
a Christian believes that the Bible is true throughout; and therefore 
events in the external world, like the bodily resurrection of Jesus 
Christ, must be true.

In addition, the same article states that the writers of the Bible 
"though moved by the Holy Spirit, wrought in accordance with the laws of 
the human mind." This sentence, continued Dr. Machen, denies the 
supernaturalness of the Bible. "What is in accordance with the laws of 
the human mind or with any others of the laws of nature is natural, what 
is not in accordance with the laws of the human mind or any of the 
others of the laws of nature is supernatural."[11]

Another main objection to the Plan of Union concerned the formula of 
creed-subscription. The formula read, "Do you believe and acknowledge 
the system of doctrine professed by this Church as contained in the 
Westminster Confession of Faith, the Larger and Shorter Catechisms, as 
taught in the Word of God, and do you engage to adhere to and maintain 
its truths?"[12] Dr. Machen attacked this formula as undermining the 
faith of the church at the most vital point:

    According to the proposed new formula of creed-subscription the 
Bible may teach any number of systems and the system contained in the 
Westminster Confession of Faith may be held to be only one of them.... 
If the Bible contains various contradictory systems of doctrine, then 
the "infallibility" of the Bible spoken of in the first question of the 
formula of creed-subscription can mean very little; and certainly it is 
little short of blasphemous to call such a self-contradictory book the 
"Word of God."[13]

Apparently the able modernist journal, The Christian Century, agreed 
with Dr. Machen's interpretation. "One is not, then, required to affirm 
that there can be no other system of doctrine whose component parts are 
not also drawn from the teachings of the Bible.... Professor Machen is, 
we think, right in so interpreting the new formula."[14]

Mr. John Murray of Westminster Theological Seminary also attacked the 
confessional statement, not only with respect to the authority of holy 
Scripture, but also its doctrine of creation, salvation, atonement, and 
of God the Father. His main thrust was aimed at the doctrine of the 
atonement which, he claimed, tended to teach universal atonement as 
opposed to the limited or definite atonement of the Westminster 
Confession of Faith, which means that the atonement is effectual only to 
those who are called of God.

Dr. Samuel G. Craig, editor of Christianity Today, and Dr. C. E. 
Macartney attacked the Plan of Union from a different point of view and 
warned the United Presbyterian Church that the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA was a doctrinally divided church. There were modernists, 
middle-of-the-roaders, and evangelicals, and as Dr. Craig pointed out, 
the modernist-indifferentist party was in control.[15] Dr. Macartney 
argued, "If the United Presbyterians wish to unite with our church, they 
should act in full knowledge of the lamentable doctrinal condition which 
now obtains within the Presbyterian Church."[16]

Dr. Gordon A. McLennan, pastor of the Shadyside United Presbyterian 
Church, Pittsburgh, writing in the Christian Union Herald, March 17, 
1934, agreed with Dr. Craig and Dr. Macartney. "If anyone is in any 
doubt as to the division in the Presbyterian Church, surely the 
establishment of an independent Seminary, and now an independent Board 
of Foreign Missions is of a nature to remove such doubt."

From these criticisms it becomes clear that a very strange situation 
obtained. United Presbyterians were regarded as doctrinally sounder in 
membership than the Presbyterian Church in the USA, but at the same time 
as having a confessional statement much less orthodox than the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA.

The vast majority of the ministers of the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
favored this union. Dr. Robert E. Speer, senior secretary of the Board 
of Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, in a 
semi-official article defending the new formula of creed subscription, 
stated that the words, "the system of doctrine taught in the Holy 
Scripture," is contained in the question asked of licentiates so that 
every candidate for ordination has already declared that he believes in 
only one system of doctrine as taught in the holy Scriptures.[17] Dr. 
Speer answered the criticism of the confessional statement by saying 
that the holy Scriptures are to be the final authority in matters of 
doctrine. He also mentioned that in 1928, in a Plan of Union between the 
Presbyterian Church in the US (southern) and the United Presbyterian 
Church of North America, the southern Presbyterian church accepted that 
confessional statement. This action on the part of the allegedly 
conservative southern church ought to warrant the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA in taking similar action.

The Plan of Union was vigorously defended by the Rev. W. J. Reid, D.D., 
chairman of the Committee on Presbyterian Unity of the United 
Presbyterian Church, and by the Rev. John McNaugher, D.D., president of 
Pittsburgh-Xenia Theological Seminary. Of the confessional statement Dr. 
McNaugher wrote, "However its clear recognition as having interpretative 
character scarcely lessens its influential value as an exponent of 
Reformed Theology."[18]

In appearing before the 1934 General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church 
in the USA as a guest to advocate the Plan of Union, Dr. McNaugher, in 
biting and sarcastic terms, ridiculed those who had found fault with the 
confessional statement. The objection to the phrase "spiritual truth," 
he said, warped it out of its context, "and in hermeneutics that is a 
damnable sin!" He remarked,

    Our critics are afflicted with astigmatism or abysmus, and, in 
addition, they need a heavy injection of First Corinthians thirteen!... 
Read this through [The Confessional Statement] with an open and unbiased 
eye before you retire, and it will compose you into an orthodox 
sleep—not that it is soporific, but it will make you happy, and when you 
roll over to sleep you will say, "Return unto thy rest, O my soul."[19]

When the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA met in 
1934 to vote on the Plan of Union, the only real opposition to it from 
the floor was voiced by the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths, managing 
editor of Christianity Today, who objected to the union on the grounds 
of the confessional statement, the new formula of creed-subscription, 
and the unfairness to congregations who voted not to go into the union, 
since they could not retain their church property.[20] But an overture 
in favor of union and asking the presbyteries to express their approval 
was passed by a vast majority.[21]

On the other hand the United Presbyterian Church, by a vote of 123 to 
113, turned down the Plan of Union so that any further attempts to unite 
with the United Presbyterian Church of North America would have to begin 
de novo.[22] But the defeat was due not so much to the doctrinal issues 
involved (although they were the real issues), as to the plea on the 
part of United Presbyterians that they would be overwhelmed, since their 
membership is only one-tenth that of the Presbyterian Church in the USA.

A second major attempt at union, still in progress, is that between the 
Protestant Episcopal Church in the USA and the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA. In 1888 the Protestant Episcopal Church approached the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA on the question of union, but the 
correspondence was terminated in 1896 because the Protestant Episcopal 
Church would not accept the doctrine of recognition and reciprocity "as 
a principle controlling negotiations."[23] But in 1937, the Rev. James 
De Wolfe Perry, presiding bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church, 
addressed a communication to the secretary of the general council of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, informing him that the Protestant 
Episcopal Church urged the Presbyterian Church to consider the 
possibilities of organic union between the two bodies.[24]

Upon receipt of this letter, the General Assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA adopted a resolution authorizing the moderator and 
stated clerk of the General Assembly, together with the chairman of the 
Department of Church Cooperation and Union, to inform the presiding 
bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church that the Presbyterian Church 
"declares its earnest and prayerful purpose to cooperate with the 
Protestant Episcopal Church in the U.S.A. in the study and formation of 
such plans as may make possible the union contemplated."[25]

This concordat cannot be finally and definitely adopted until the 
general convention of the Protestant Episcopal Church meets in 1940. At 
the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, June, 1939, 
no formal approval of the concordat was given, but the committee of the 
church was asked to continue negotiations.[26]

The proposed union has met strenuous objections among Presbyterians. Dr. 
C. E. Macartney set forth seven reasons why the union was not likely to 
succeed. First, it was undesired by the rank and file of both churches. 
Second, Presbyterians and Episcopalians would not seek ministers from 
each other. Third, the statement about the Bible is doctrinally 
latitudinarian. It recognizes the Scriptures as the supreme standard for 
faith and morals but also states, "in the assurance that with the 
Catholic fellowship there is room for diversity of interpretation." 
Fourth, with respect to ordination, the Presbyterians must make 
concessions by having bishops lay hands on Presbyterian ministers. 
Fifth, the Episcopal attitude toward social customs and amusements is 
different. Sixth, this union will drive a wedge between the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA and other Presbyterian bodies who are considering 
union. Seventh, these marked differences will really help to separate 
the two churches.[27]

Likewise, Episcopalians warned against undue haste in forming 
conclusions that the union will take place. Bishop Wilson, a member of 
the Protestant Episcopal Commission, wrote that the proposed concordat 
had not yet been approved by the Episcopal church. He also warned that 
the ordination element was very troublesome.

    For us to commission Presbyterian ministers without regard to 
ordination would involve us in endless difficulties.... Such a 
"commissioning" without ordination would do three things. (1) It would 
violate the whole spirit and intentions of the preface to the ordinal in 
our Prayer Book on which our own historic ministry is firmly founded. 
(2) It would run counter to the accepted standards of all other branches 
of the Anglican communion and might quite conceivably split us off from 
them. There is little to be said for that kind of unity achieved at the 
cost of still more disunion. (3) It directly contradicts our 
representation given to the Orthodox at the last Lambeth Conference on 
the subject of Holy Orders.[28]

Bishop William T. Manning, perhaps the most prominent bishop in the 
entire Protestant Episcopal Church, has very frankly cautioned against 
the proposed union as inimical to the good feeling between the two 
churches and as hindering the effective witness of the churches to the 
truth.[29]

In the meantime, four recommendations were made as "things that might be 
undertaken in common," namely, an exchange of preachers occasionally, an 
invitation to the members of each church to the Lord's table, an 
exchange of greetings from delegates of the churches, and an exchange of 
professors and students in the seminaries of both churches. None of 
these recommendations has been followed in either church to any 
appreciable extent.

The whole project is meeting with little enthusiasm and interest among 
Presbyterians and Episcopalians and the reasons seem to be quite 
obvious. The form of government of the Episcopal church with its 
conception of the ministry and its ritualism is considerably different 
from that of traditional Presbyterianism. The Episcopal church 
discipline is founded on the principle of rule by bishops with great 
concentration of power in their control, while Presbyterianism is a 
representative form of government, that is, a rule by teaching and 
ruling presbyters or elders. The parity of the clergy in Presbyterianism 
would make it difficult for ministers to accept the higher authority of 
the bishops in the Episcopal sense. Underlying this radically different 
view of the ministry is the scriptural interpretation of it. Most 
Presbyterians would surrender their form of government either completely 
or partially with great reluctance. Dr. Mark A. Matthews of the 
Presbyterian church expressed this view when he wrote, "The Presbyterian 
Church will never surrender its ordination by its presbyteries ... The 
Presbyterian Church will never surrender its form of government ..."[30]

The ritualism of the Episcopal church is another formidable barrier. 
Presbyterianism has followed a very simple form of worship with the 
sermon as the central part of the service, while the Episcopal church 
has a highly developed form of symbolism in worship, even in the low 
church congregations, with the sermon occupying a less prominent place 
than the ritualistic element in the service. The doctrinal statements of 
each church are fundamentally Calvinistic and so would not present such 
great difficulties.

But there is another phase to the whole enterprise which must give pause 
to many in the two churches, and that is the moral element. How can a 
Presbyterian in good conscience who believes that the Presbyterian form 
of government is that which is taught in the Bible give way, even by 
indirection, to episcopacy?[31] The whole tradition of the Presbyterian 
church is so fundamentally opposed to episcopacy that it is likely to be 
the deciding factor in the attempt to unite. There are indications that 
this factor will prevent the union at least for many years to come.

The attempt at organic union with the Presbyterian Church in the US 
(southern) is the most likely to succeed, because the two churches have 
the same confession of faith and much the same form of government. Two 
forces militate against such a union: the fear of the southern church 
that it will be submerged in the Presbyterian Church in the USA, which 
has four times as many members, and the suspicion and conviction of some 
that the so-called northern church is not true doctrinally to its 
constitution.

After the Civil War a committee was appointed by the General Assembly of 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA to confer with the Presbyterian 
Church in the US to seek closer and more fraternal relations. In 
response the Presbyterian Church in the US from time to time appointed a 
similar committee on union but the movement advanced very little beyond 
this stage until 1917. At that time overtures were received from 195 
presbyteries of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, urging the General 
Assembly to unite with the Presbyterian Church in the US. The General 
Assembly took action urging that organic union between the two churches 
be considered.[32]

The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the US replied:

    While this Assembly does not regard organic union as practicable at 
this time, yet it hereby appoints the Committee of Conference on Union 
asked for by the Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., and 
recommends to the proposed Conference the consideration of the 
federation of all the Presbyterian Churches of our country upon some 
practical and effective basis.[33]

A plan of reunion was presented to the Presbyterian Church in the US, 
and in reply the committee of the Presbyterian Church in the US drafted 
a Plan of Federal Union of all Presbyterian and Reformed Churches in the 
United States. This plan of federal union was presented not only to the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, but also to the Reformed Church in the 
US, the United Presbyterian Church of North America, the Reformed Church 
in America, the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Synod, the Christian 
Reformed Church in North America, the Welsh Calvinistic Methodist or 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, the Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian 
Church of North America, the General Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian 
Church, the Cumberland Presbyterian Church, and the Cumberland 
Presbyterian Church, Colored.[34] In general the plan of federation was 
a loose one which called for a federal general assembly having very 
restricted powers.[35]

After much discussion it became evident that the Presbyterian Church in 
the US did not desire organic union, and that the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA saw no gain in entering into a union on the basis of the plan of 
federal union, because no closer association would be secured by it than 
already existed.

Committees from both churches have continued with conferences on the 
general subject of union but with little result. The Rev. Charles W. 
Welch, D.D., of the Presbytery of Louisville was elected moderator of 
the 1938 General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, in the 
hope that a Southerner would appeal to the Presbyterian Church in the 
US. In fact, the individual who nominated him for this office made that 
the burden of his speech.

On the other hand, the Presbyterian Church in the US dismissed its 
Committee on Union at its General Assembly in 1938. In 1939, by a small 
margin, it voted to ask the presbyteries to express their attitude 
toward such a union.[36]

In other words, the enthusiasm and interest in the union are nearly all 
on the part of the Presbyterian Church in the USA. It seems almost 
certain that organic union between the two churches is very much in the 
future. If the Presbyterian Church in the USA continues along its 
present trend toward modernism, the union may never take place, unless 
there is a disruption in the Presbyterian Church in the US caused by 
modernism, in which case the liberal element of the church will be very 
much in favor of union.

The whole union enterprise in the Presbyterian Church in the USA in the 
past two decades has been motivated by the conviction that outward unity 
of organization is the great need and goal of Protestantism today. This 
spirit was expressed by John D. Rockefeller, Jr.:

    Only a united Christian world can stem the rising tide of 
materialism, of selfishness, of shaken traditions, of crumbling moral 
standards, and point the way out. How such a union might be brought 
about was once suggested by Dr. Stanley Jones, to whose stimulating 
address we have just listened. He proposed one Church, to be called the 
Church of Christ, or it might be called the Church of the Living God, 
with all sectarian churches as branches. Thus individual and 
non-essential differences would be preserved, while in the fundamentals 
of religion in God's love and Christ's loving spirit-all would be 
united.[37]

In fact, the whole Protestant world is under the spell of this 
conviction. A united Christian church may be a commendable goal, but the 
necessary doctrinal vagueness which must result from such a union would 
vitiate the whole enterprise. Any large union which may result in the 
future is most likely to be along doctrinal lines rather than 
denominational ones.

The time has come in each denomination for a separation between those 
who believe the Bible and those who do not; such a division would result 
in real Christian unity. But such vague and meager doctrinal bases which 
have been proposed so far as the foundation for a united Christendom 
would create a church which the historic Christian church would hardly 
be able to recognize, and which would certainly be ineffective for great 
spiritual work among individuals and the nations. What is needed, and 
needed badly, is a rebirth of genuine enthusiasm for, and belief in, the 
miraculous gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, which proclaims that all men 
are lost in sin and separated from God and in need of redemption and 
reuniting with God the Father. This should be the great message of the 
church; it should be the consuming desire of every minister in the 
Christian church. If that comes to pass, all ideas of a false and feeble 
outward church union will be forgotten, and the church will have 
returned to its true mission.

The spirit of unionism in the Presbyterian Church in the USA is strong, 
and will continue to grow as the doctrinal witness and consciousness of 
the church becomes weaker. It is safe to predict that, if modernism 
continues its present hold on the life of that church, union enterprises 
on a vague, meaningless doctrinal basis will be entered into and very 
likely consummated.
