Chapter 7. The Deliverance of the 1934 General Assembly

IT BECAME increasingly evident that some official action against the 
organizers of the Independent Board would be taken at the 1934 General 
Assembly. Dr. John McDowell, moderator of the 1933 General Assembly, 
issued a statement in the fall of 1933 which hinted strongly that the 
formation of the Independent Board was, in his opinion, in violation of 
the provisions of the constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA.[1]

On May 3, 1934, Dr. Machen, the Rev. Paul Woolley, the Rev. H. 
McAllister Griffiths, and Mr. Murray Forst Thompson were called into a 
conference with representatives of the general council and told that it 
was the unanimous opinion of the general council that the Independent 
Board was contrary to the fundamental principles of the constitution of 
the church, and that the members of the Independent Board were violating 
their ordination and membership vows.[2] These men were also informed 
that a document was in the press setting forth the council's reasons for 
this opinion and that this document was to be sent to all the 
commissioners of the coming assembly.

Shortly before the convening of the 146th General Assembly at Cleveland, 
Ohio, on May 24, 1934, the general council of the General Assembly sent 
out the above-mentioned document, a 43-page pamphlet, Studies of the 
Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. These so-called 
Studies purported to lay the groundwork for the deliverance which was 
adopted by that assembly, and enunciated the principle that every member 
of the church is required by the constitution to support the missionary 
program of the church in the same way that each member must take part in 
the Lord's Supper.[3]

The first question which arises is, Did the general council have the 
authority to issue such a document without direct orders from the 
General Assembly, or was the general council presumptuous in this 
matter? The council defends its action by quoting chapter XXVI, section 
II, of the Form of Government which lists as one of the duties of the 
council, "to consider between annual meetings of the General Assembly 
cases of serious embarrassment or emergency concerning the benevolent 
and missionary work of the church, and to provide direct means of 
relief."

No one need be left in doubt as to the powers of the general council 
with reference to initiating action against members of the Independent 
Board. Chapter XXVI, section XII, of the Form of Government reads:

    General Councils shall handle and consider only such administrative 
business as may be referred to them by the electing judicatories as 
indicated in the succeeding sections, and shall have no power of 
initiation except as hereinafter provided. No judicial business shall be 
referred to a General Council.

The Rev. William B. Pugh, D.D., the alleged author of the Studies and 
now the stated clerk of the General Assembly, claimed that this section 
refers only to general councils of presbyteries and synods and not to 
the general council of the General Assembly as interpreted by the 
General Assembly of 1930.[4]

In answer to Dr. Pugh, it can be said that the interpretation of the 
General Assembly is not a part of the constitution of the church, but 
simply an action of one assembly which has no binding effect upon the 
succeeding assemblies. Even if this interpretation had binding effect 
upon the succeeding assemblies, the second part of that interpretation 
proves beyond doubt that the general council erred in initiating action 
against the Independent Board. It reads, "That business of a doctrinal 
or judicial character ... shall not be originated by or referred to the 
General Council of the General Assembly." No one can deny that the 
business regarding the Independent Board was of a judicial or doctrinal 
character. As the Northumberland Presbytery stated, this action was 
practically "conviction before trial."[5]

Dr. Machen characterized the claims of the general council as follows:

    The whole notion that the General Council is a sort of ad interim 
Star Chamber court and supreme administrative agency combined is 
entirely abhorrent to the Constitution of the Church and entirely 
contrary to the sections of the Constitution in which the powers of the 
General Council are defined.[6]

It is also apparent that the organization of the Independent Board was 
not the cause for "serious embarrassment or emergency" in the missionary 
work of the church, but rather the result of a deplorable situation. The 
Board of Foreign Missions had refused to take a positive stand against 
the Laymen's Report and Pearl Buck's unbelief. It is very doubtful that 
the reductions in missionary giving would have been less even if the 
Independent Board had never been organized. Bible-believers had lost 
confidence in the board and its program and could not be induced to 
contribute unless a radical reform took place.

The Studies further argue that the General Assembly "has all the power 
the Church would have if it were possible to convene the Church together 
in one place."[7] The only agency in the church which would have power 
even approaching this in degree is the General Assembly plus two-thirds 
of the presbyteries, which combination can amend the Confession of 
Faith.[8] If the General Assembly alone assumed such power it would 
simply nullify the constitution and place mere acts of the General 
Assembly, which in themselves are only pious advice, on a par with 
constitutional provisions. The constitution has very wisely provided for 
protection of the individual, the session, and the presbytery against 
any tyranny of the higher courts. As a matter of fact, the Presbytery of 
Northumberland exercised this right and repudiated the action of the 
General Assembly with reference to the Independent Board when it adopted 
the report of its Ad Interim Committee on Bills and Overtures which 
stated that the action was unconstitutional.[9]

The entire pamphlet sent out by the general council and its argument 
that a serious emergency existed in the missionary work of the church is 
based upon the conviction that the Independent Board is within the 
church and so subject to the jurisdiction of the church courts. Such an 
argument is fallacious.

The Independent Board never made the claim that it was a missionary 
organization of the Presbyterian Church in the USA. The word 
"Independent" in its name implies that the board is not a part of the 
constituted mission agencies of the church. The first issue of the 
Independent Board's official magazine states, "Why is it called the 
'Independent Board'? Because, according to its Charter, it is 
independent of ecclesiastical control. Its Charter expressly states that 
it is ecclesiastically independent."[10] In a statement adopted by the 
Executive Committee of the Independent Board on May 10, 1934, the 
independency of the board is clearly enunciated.[11]

As soon as the general secretary of the Independent Board took office in 
February, 1934, he sent out a pamphlet stating the program of the board. 
In this pamphlet no claim whatsoever is made that the board is within 
the church. Quite the contrary is stated. "It [the Independent Board] is 
independent in that it is not responsible, as an organization, to the 
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., or to any 
other ecclesiastical body."[12] This is true of all the Independent 
Board literature, so that the statement of the general council that 
"certain ministers and laymen of the Presbyterian Church in organizing 
within the denomination an 'Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign 
Missions'" is without basis in fact. Furthermore, there were members of 
the Independent Board who were not ministers or members of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA. One was a minister of the Presbyterian 
Church in the United States, and one was a member of another Protestant 
communion. How could an organization with such a mixed membership claim 
to be within the Presbyterian Church in the USA or be judged to be 
within the church?

The question then resolves itself to this: "Does the law of the church 
prohibit the formation of the Independent Board?"[13] Chapter XXIII of 
the Form of Government states that there may be organizations "for the 
conduct of a special work for missionary and other benevolent purposes, 
or for the purpose of instruction in religion and development in 
Christian nurture." Such agencies must be responsible to a session, 
presbytery, synod, or general assembly, depending upon the scope of 
their activities. But this chapter contemplates organizations within the 
church which have a relationship to its judicatories and in no way 
includes boards which operate outside of the jurisdiction of the church, 
even though members of such boards may also be ministers or members of 
the church. Individuals within the Presbyterian Church in the USA have a 
perfect right to associate themselves together along with others to form 
a charitable organization. In fact, many such agencies with the word 
Presbyterian in their title exist. As the editor of Christianity Today 
wrote,

    It is contrary to fact, we believe, to state that the Independent 
Board is an organization "within the Church" in the sense alleged by the 
General Council. If so, it would seem that the Presbyterian and Reformed 
Publishing Company, under whose auspices Christianity Today is 
published, is also an organization "within the Church" and subject to 
General Assembly control. It, too, is incorporated under the laws of the 
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with a Constitution and Bylaws. All its 
officers and members are either ministers or elders of the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A. Moreover, inasmuch as its editors are subject to 
its Board of Directors, it "assumes the direction of persons who are 
subject to the authority of church judicatories" and to that extent 
exercises what the General Council calls "ecclesiastical functions." It 
would seem also that without authority of the General Assembly it 
exercises what the general council calls "administrative functions" as 
it appeals to Presbyterians to "provide the ways and means"—to make 
financial contributions in other words—by which the paper may continue 
to be published. What is true of the Presbyterian and Reformed 
Publishing Company is also true in all essential respects of the 
companies that publish The Presbyterian, The Presbyterian Advance and 
The Presbyterian Banner, not to mention a host of other educational and 
benevolent corporations. We submit that the Independent Board for 
Presbyterian Foreign Missions is no more an organization "within the 
Church" than are our religious newspapers or any educational or 
benevolent organization that employs Presbyterian ministers or that 
appeals to Presbyterians for financial support.[14]

It was further argued by those opposed to the Independent Board that the 
ministers and elders who had formed the Independent Board violated their 
ordination vows which promised, among other things, to study the peace, 
unity, and purity of the church.[15] It will be noticed that the vow 
pledges the minister "to be zealous and faithful in maintaining the 
truths of the gospel, and the purity and peace of the Church; whatever 
persecution or opposition may arise unto them on that account." It is 
plain from this pledge that peace is not to be gained at any price, but 
rather that the purity of the church and the truths of the gospel are to 
be maintained so that true peace will prevail. The minister is to accept 
"whatever persecution or opposition may arise ... on that account," so 
that controversy is not to be avoided but rather borne for the sake of 
the gospel. Members of the Independent Board could rightfully claim that 
they were most faithful to their vows for they attempted with all their 
powers to warn the church of unbelief in its midst.

The argument of the council is based upon the false idea that the 
liberty of an individual ceases when he joins the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA. As Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Murray Forst Thompson so ably put it:

    The whole burden of the General Council's argument is that when one 
joins the Presbyterian Church he has exercised his one and only act of 
freedom, and henceforth must either be obedient to all that he is 
ordered to do, or withdraw from the Church. And this in a Church whose 
Standards declare, "All synods and councils since the Apostles' times, 
whether general or particular, may err, and [many] have erred; therefore 
they are not to be made the rule of faith and practice..." (Confession 
of Faith, chapter XXXI, section III). The General Council thus flouts 
the law of the Church, and requires of its members an obedience to 
"synods and councils" which the law itself does not require! Indeed the 
Confession of Faith in the preceding section distinctively repudiates 
this erroneous idea of the authority of Church courts, and says that 
their decrees are to be received only "if consonant to the Word of 
God."[16]

In other words, when the general council sent out the Studies, it was 
not only exceeding its power but interfering in an organization over 
which it had no jurisdiction and to which it had no relationship. It 
appeared then, and it appears even more clearly now, that the 
ecclesiastical organization of the church was determined to stifle the 
testimony of the Independent Board to the gospel and to keep the 
corporate testimony of the church in conformity with the liberal 
tendencies of the day.

The section of the Studies which deals with missionary giving strikes at 
the very heart of Protestantism and the Bible and so demands a full 
exposition and refutation. Dr. Machen's document is so able and states 
so clearly the great Christian principles which are involved in the 
controversy, that we can do no better than to consider its 
arguments.[17] The statements in this brief are practically a Christian 
manifesto of what the Bible teaches on missionary giving, and on the 
subject of obedience to the authority of the Word of God rather than to 
human authority.

Dr. Machen gives four reasons for refusing to obey the order of the 
General Assembly to sever his connections with the Independent Board. 
First, "Obedience to the order in the way demanded by the General 
Assembly would involve support of a propaganda that is contrary to the 
gospel of Christ."[18] In chapter six it was pointed out plainly that 
the Board of Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian Church in the USA had 
been guilty of supporting and encouraging propaganda that is contrary to 
the Bible. Dr. Machen also rightly claimed that his charges against the 
policy of the board had never been refuted. After six years that claim 
is still valid. What is more, he argues, Pearl Buck's resignation was 
not asked for but was accepted "with regret" and "earnest prayer that 
her unusual abilities may continue to be richly used in behalf of the 
people of China."

The Rev. Lindsay S. B. Hadley, a signer of the Auburn Affirmation, 
resigned as candidate secretary of the board, but the members of the 
board, so Dr. Machen continues, still regard him as capable and 
admirable for such a position so that the board continues to support a 
signer of the Auburn Affirmation in a responsible position. In other 
words, since the board condoned such modernism and allowed exponents of 
it to remain under its jurisdiction, Mr. Machen could not support the 
board and be true to the Bible.

In the second place, Dr. Machen states that he cannot obey the order of 
the General Assembly because by so doing he would substitute human 
authority for the authority of the Word of God. This claim is 
substantiated by the fact that the General Assembly has said that an 
individual who...

    will not give to promote the officially authorized missionary 
program of the Presbyterian Church is in exactly the same position with 
reference to the Constitution of the Church as a church member or an 
individual that would refuse to take part in the celebration of the 
Lord's Supper or any other of the prescribed ordinances of the 
denomination as set forth in chapter VII of the Form of Government.[19]

This means that a member or minister of the church must support whatever 
missionary program may be established by successive general assemblies 
regardless of the program's faithfulness to the Bible. To prove that 
this is the true inference to be drawn from the above statement, Dr. 
Machen cites five examples.

First, the Presbytery of New Brunswick adopted a provision on September 
26, 1933, stating that "all candidates seeking licensure or ordination 
shall be examined as to their willingness to support the regularly 
authorized Boards and agencies of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., 
particularly the Board of Foreign Missions." As a second example, he 
says that some members of the Presbytery of Chester voted against the 
action of the presbytery in licensing certain candidates because these 
young men would not give a blanket promise to support the boards and 
agencies of the church. Thirdly, Dr. Machen maintains that the 
complainants of the Presbytery of Philadelphia were opposed to the 
reception of Dr. Machen from the Presbytery of New Brunswick, because 
they were not allowed to question him concerning his allegiance to the 
boards of the church. As a fourth example, he states that the Presbytery 
of Baltimore refused to license Mr. Calvin K. Cummings on the same 
ground. As a fifth case, Dr. Machen argues that the stated clerk of the 
General Assembly wrote to the stated clerk of the Presbytery of 
Baltimore,

    If and when any students from Westminster Seminary come before your 
Presbytery, they should be informed that the Presbytery will neither 
license nor ordain them until they have given a written pledge that they 
will support the official agencies of the church as a part of their 
pledge of loyalty to the government and discipline of the church.[20]

These examples are convincing evidence that Dr. Machen's interpretation 
of the assembly's action is correct.

In the third place, Dr. Machen could not obey the order of the General 
Assembly because it advocates the principle that support of the church 
is "not a matter of free will giving but the payment of a tax enforced 
by penalties." The Studies seem to allow free will giving from the 
following quotation:

    On the contrary, it [the General Assembly] has always maintained 
that the right to control the property of the members of the Church, to 
assess the amount of their contributions, or to prescribe how they shall 
dispose of their money, is utterly foreign to the spirit of 
Presbyterianism. Every contribution on the part of an individual member 
must be purely voluntary.[21]

But the following quotation from the same report contradicts the first 
statement.

    In maintaining, however, this personal freedom of individual 
members, in their contributions to the Church, the General Assembly has 
never recognized any inconsistency in asserting with equal force, that 
there is a definite and sacred obligation on the part of every member of 
the Presbyterian Church to contribute to those objects designated by the 
authorized judicatory of the denomination.[22]

Dr. Machen paraphrases these conflicting assertions of the Studies as 
follows:

    Support of the Boards is voluntary; don't you dare say that it is 
not voluntary; but all the same, if you do not come right across with it 
we shall see that it will be the worse for you ... You may enter the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. or not as you please, ... but if you 
do enter you must leave your Christian liberty behind. If you once enter 
you are slaves. Henceforth support of whatever missionary program 
successive General Assemblies may set up is obligatory upon you whether 
you think the program right or wrong. If you think that the missionary 
program of any General Assembly is so wrong that you cannot 
conscientiously support it, then the only thing for you to do is to 
leave the Church."[23]

In the fourth place, Dr. Machen claims that all of the three mentioned 
implications of obedience to the order of the General Assembly are 
contrary to the Bible. The Bible requires that a Christian must preach 
the gospel of Christ and forbids him to preach any other gospel. "Though 
we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that 
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed" (Gal 1:8). This 
statement, as Dr. Machen so clearly writes, is a summary of what runs 
throughout the entire Bible. Christianity is utterly exclusive.

The Bible forbids a man to substitute human authority for the Word of 
God. "Ye were bought with a price; be not ye the servants of men" (I Cor 
7:23). As Dr. Machen claims,

    In demanding that I shall shift my message to suit the shifting 
votes of an Assembly that is elected every year, the General Assembly is 
attacking Christian liberty; but what should never be forgotten is that 
to attack Christian liberty is to attack the lordship of Jesus 
Christ.[24]

The Bible also upholds the principle of free will offerings as opposed 
to a tax enforced by penalties. "Every man according as he prospereth in 
his heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God 
loveth a cheerful giver" (II Cor 9:7).

Dr. Machen concludes his masterful brief on the subject by asserting, 
"Since the Action of the General Assembly was unconstitutional it should 
be ignored both by the individuals concerned and by the 
Presbyteries."[25] This advice the members of the Independent Board 
followed.

The Studies of the Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
had been sent to the commissioners in advance of the 1934 General 
Assembly, but no one knew just what action the General Assembly would 
recommend. On Friday (May 25th) at one o'clock, only a few minutes 
before adjournment for luncheon, and on the very afternoon set aside for 
consideration of this matter, the resolution of the general council was 
distributed to the commissioners. Most of the Commissioners hardly had 
time to read the proposed action, let alone prepare an answer to it. 
Such a procedure failed to observe the ordinary rights of parliamentary 
justice and demonstrated the fear and unreasonableness which must have 
possessed the council.

The action which was read by the stated clerk of the assembly commanded 
the Independent Board to cease soliciting funds within the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, and demanded that ministers of the church resign from 
the board or suffer discipline.[26]

As soon as the document was read, Dr. Mark A. Matthews, a member of the 
general council, arose and proceeded to deliver a long lecture on the 
theory of representative government and its divisions into executive, 
legislative, and judicial power. Most of his remarks were irrelevant to 
the issue, but his general discourse on Presbyterian law in a vague way 
tended to impress the commissioners that the Independent Board was 
illegal and that the members of it should be asked to resign from the 
board or suffer church discipline.

The Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths, managing editor of Christianity Today 
and a member of the Independent Board, obtained the floor and in a short 
but effective speech declared that the proposed action was 
unconstitutional and that the Independent Board was not within the 
jurisdiction of the Presbyterian Church in the USA. He used some of the 
arguments which have already been discussed. More speeches were made for 
and against the resolution, but after several hours of debate it was 
passed by a vote of approximately four to one.[27]

The issue raised by the deliverance of the 1934 General Assembly was not 
merely technical or legal, but of fundamental importance. Let no man 
maintain that the difference was only administrative or governmental or 
a question of interpreting the constitution of the church correctly. It 
placed in juxtaposition two authorities, the Bible on the one hand, and 
the decrees of a human council on the other. Allegiance to the Lord 
Jesus Christ is demanded in the Word of God, and when that conflicts 
with the commands of men, a Christian must follow Christ regardless of 
cost. Six years have elapsed since the deliverance was adopted, 
sufficient time to consider the controversy calmly and in the light of 
facts, but only one conclusion is possible: the General Assembly erred 
and acted in a manner contrary to the Word of God and contrary to its 
own constitution. And what is more tragic, it resulted in the 
resignation of ministers and laymen from the church, some of whom were 
among the most consistent and the most vigorous opponents of unbelief. 
It left the modernists and the doctrinal indifferentists in complete 
control of the church.
