Chapter 12. The Orthodox Presbyterian Church

THE SPIRIT and the decisions of the 1935 General Assembly made it clear 
that the conservatives of the church would have to organize and unite on 
a definite program of reform and preparation for what seemed like the 
inevitable—a split in the church. Accordingly, a letter was written by 
two elders and a layman and addressed to 100 or more conservative 
leaders in the East, inviting them to be present at a meeting in 
Philadelphia on June 27, 1935, for the purpose of considering a plan of 
united action.

Approximately 100 attended the meeting at which time the Presbyterian 
Constitutional Covenant Union was organized, officers elected, an 
executive committee formed, and a constitution adopted. A campaign was 
launched to obtain signers of the covenant, to form chapters, and to 
promote the program of the Covenant Union. The covenant read as follows:

    We, the members of this Covenant Union, are resolved, in accordance 
with God's Word, and in humble reliance upon His grace, to maintain the 
Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., (1) making every 
effort to bring about a reform of the existing church organization, and 
to restore the church's clear and glorious Christian testimony, which 
modernism and indifferentism have now so grievously silenced, but (2) if 
such efforts fail and in particular if the tyrannical policy of the 
present majority triumphs, holding ourselves ready to perpetuate the 
true Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., regardless of cost.

It became obvious that the officers and executive committee of the 
Covenant Union were determined not only to expose modernism in the 
boards of the church and to attempt a reform, but also to prepare for 
the probable division in the church if the members of the Independent 
Board were ousted. This was certain from the second part of the pledge.

Immediately, the Covenant Union was attacked not only by the church 
machine but also by the Rev. Samuel G. Craig, D.D., a former member of 
the board of trustees of Westminster Theological Seminary and a former 
member of the Independent Board, because the Covenant Union by its 
pledge committed men to withdraw from the church if members of the 
Independent Board were expelled from the church.

    While in our opinion one of the planks of that platform should 
commit its supporters to the defense of the members of the Independent 
Board against the unchristian and unconstitutional mandate of the 1934 
Assembly, we are persuaded that it must be broad enough to provide seats 
for many who think that the formation of the Independent Board was 
unwise or premature, and even for some who think its formation of 
questionable constitutionality. It is high time, it seems to us, for a 
conference of representative conservatives or evangelicals or 
fundamentalists—call them what you will—to discover whether it is not 
possible to agree on such a platform and in such leadership.[1]

Such outspoken criticism and opposition on the part of one who was 
editor of Christianity Today, the paper which had been launched in 1930 
to carry on the fight against modernism in the church, and to which the 
conservatives in the church looked for leadership, called for an 
important decision. If the Covenant Union could not express its views 
and promote its program through the pages of Christianity Today, then 
another journal had to be started which would further the aims of the 
Covenant Union and those who were carrying the main burden of the 
conflict.

Prior to this Dr. Machen, as well as other members of the Independent 
Board, had carried on an extensive correspondence with Dr. Craig because 
of his indirect attacks on the Independent Board. Dr. Machen contended 
that in 1933, Christianity Today and the editorials in the paper had 
defended the Independent Board.[2] An editorial in the paper, June, 
1933, stated, "As matters now stand, they [Bible-believers] must either 
make their contributions to Foreign Missions through non-Presbyterian 
channels or they must establish a new agency." In the September, 1935, 
issue of Christianity Today, Dr. Craig assumed an entirely different 
attitude. He then defended a third alternative, namely, the designation 
of gifts to sound missionaries under the Board of Foreign Missions of 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA.

In answer to this allegation, Dr. Craig argued that the first editorial 
was written by Mr. Griffiths, then managing editor of Christianity 
Today, and so the opinion expressed was not his own, yet now Dr. Craig 
claimed, "Whatever of praise or blame is due its editorial policy should 
be placed wholly to the account of its editor."[3]

Dr. Machen made further criticisms of Dr. Craig's policy, among them the 
lack of attention given to trials of members of the Independent Board, 
particularly in the September, 1935 issue, when all of the Independent 
Board trials which were the center of controversy in the church were 
dismissed with a third of a column in the paper.

This "drift" in the policy of the journal which left the conservatives 
in the church without an adequate organ of expression, and this open 
attack on the newly organized Covenant Union, brought the resignation of 
the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths as managing editor of Christianity 
Today, and the establishment of the Presbyterian Guardian as a paper 
directly under the sponsorship of the Covenant Union and edited by Mr. 
Griffiths, with Thomas R. Birch as assistant editor. Mr. Griffiths was 
also made general secretary of the Covenant Union and offices were 
opened in Philadelphia.

This division in the ranks of the conservatives was a great blow to 
their cause and a source of satisfaction to the leaders of the church. 
It was founded upon a fundamental difference of approach to the whole 
problem of reform and the battle for the faith, which will be considered 
in detail in another chapter under the title, "Reform from Within."

In the very first issue of the Presbyterian Guardian, Dr. Machen set the 
standard for the movement when he wrote,

    We cannot trust the world; we cannot trust that elusive something 
known as "civilization!" We cannot, alas, trust the visible church. But 
when God speaks we can trust Him. He has spoken in the Bible. We can 
find our way through all the mists if we will make that blessed Book our 
guide.

Another article in the same issue stated, "By the grace of God we will 
contend against all forms of unbelief. We shall not cease to maintain 
and defend the inspired Word of God and the Constitution of the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. 'regardless of cost.'"

The Covenant Union began immediately an intensive campaign to interest 
individuals in the support of its program and to form chapters 
throughout the nation. Public rallies were held in support of the new 
organization and in opposition to the tyranny of the church in its 
apparent determination to force the members of the Independent Board 
from the church. Not only did the Covenant Union add members to its 
cause, but in line with the pledge to bring about a reform in the 
existing church organization, a full exposé of modernism in the other 
boards and organizations was begun. Even in the Board of Foreign 
Missions more evidence was produced of its unfaithfulness to the Bible 
and the doctrinal standards of the church.

Nine articles by different men were written concerning unbelief in the 
Board of Christian Education. What was exposed in that agency 
corresponded largely with the facts discovered in the Foreign Mission 
Board. Signers of the Auburn Affirmation were found in places of 
authority in the educational program of the church,

    (1) Two, as members of the Board; (2) One, as an officer of the 
Staff of the Board, in charge of the Department of Colleges, Theological 
Seminaries and Training Schools; (3) Five as Field Representatives who 
are responsible at headquarters to the Secretary of the Board, who work 
under the supervision of synodical or presbyterial committees on 
Christian Education in order to make the Board's program effective; and 
(4) Ten among the university pastors...[4]

The literature issued by the board was found to be not only silent 
concerning the great and central doctrines of Christianity, but in some 
instances opposed to them. The books recommended included three written 
by outstanding modernists of the day, among them, The Meaning of Prayer, 
by H. E. Fosdick, and The Life of Prayer in a World of Science, by 
William Adams Brown. The various departments under the sponsorship of 
the board were found to be anything but faithful to the central message 
of Christianity. For example, the direction of the board's program in 
higher education was under the leadership of Dr. W. L Young, a signer of 
the Auburn Affirmation.[5]

In order to implement these charges against the Board of Christian 
Education in the way provided by the constitution of the church, an 
overture was introduced in the Presbytery of Philadelphia asking that 
the board exercise care in electing members, secretaries, in issuing 
literature, and in cooperating with union movements, in order to keep 
modernism from the board's program.[6] Dr. George E. Barnes, newly 
elected Auburn Affirmation moderator of the presbytery, ruled this 
overture out of order.

Strangely enough, this overture was worded in the accustomed way. In 
fact, it followed the wording of the overture concerning the Board of 
Foreign Missions which had been passed by the Presbytery of Philadelphia 
in 1933. The difference was that in 1933 the conservatives controlled 
the presbytery, but in 1936 the Auburn Affirmationists were in the 
saddle.

An overture from the Presbytery of Philadelphia North was presented to 
the 1936 General Assembly, asking that the Board of Christian Education 
see to it that its literature be in accord with the standards of the 
church.[7] This overture was referred to the Board of Christian 
Education and more or less forgotten.

A similar overture was presented by the Presbytery of Milwaukee and 
referred to the Board of Christian Education by the 1936 General 
Assembly for due consideration.[8] An exposé was also begun with respect 
to the Board of National Missions and the same results 
obtained—modernism held the upper hand.[9]

Of the seventeen minister members of the Board of Christian Education, 
seven were signers of the Auburn Affirmation and of these seven at least 
one, the Rev. Henry Sloane Coffin, D.D., president of Union Theological 
Seminary, New York City, is one of the leading modernists in America. 
Not only did he sign the Auburn Affirmation, but his books reveal 
clearly what his opinions are concerning the great doctrines of the 
church. In his book Some Christian Convictions, he writes as follows 
about the canon of holy Scripture:

    He [a Protestant] is not bound by the opinion of others, however 
many and venerable; and unless a book commends itself to his own 
spiritual judgment, he is under no obligation to receive it as the Word 
of God to him. As a matter of fact every Christian does make such a 
Bible of his own; the particular passages which "grip" him and reproduce 
their experience in him, they, and they alone, are his Bible.[10]

Nothing could more flatly contradict the Westminster Confession of Faith 
on the canon of holy Scripture and the authority of all Scripture. 
Chapter I, section II, after naming the sixty-six books of the Bible, 
states, "All which are given by inspiration of God, to be the rule of 
faith and life."

The Rev. W. H. Boddy, D.D., pastor of the large and influential 
Westminster Presbyterian Church, Minneapolis, Minnesota, not only signed 
the Auburn Affirmation, but also was a member of the National Committee 
of the Modern Missions Movement, whose avowed purpose was

    ... to foster the further consideration of the possible world 
service of Christianity as indicated by the Laymen's Foreign Missions 
Inquiry; to serve as a medium of information; and to cooperate with any 
Board, Church or other agency which is making effective the principles 
and recommendations of the Report [Re-Thinking Missions] and of the 
Regional Reports by the Commission of Appraisal.[11]

The anti-Christian religion of Re-Thinking Missions has already been 
considered.

Not only were some members of the board aligned against biblical 
Christianity, but also the general secretary, the Rev. E. Graham Wilson, 
D.D., was a signer of the Auburn Affirmation. The literature issued by 
the board was also examined and found to be wanting in its adherence to 
the Confession of Faith.[12] And so another board of the church was 
proven to be untrue to the Confession of Faith.

While the Covenant Union was continuing its attempt to reform the 
existing church organization by bringing the true situation to the 
attention of the members of the church, the prosecution of the 
Independent Board members went on unabated, and the goal toward which 
the rulers of the church were working came closer with each month. 
Philadelphia and Chester Presbyteries were reorganized so as to be 
controlled by those in sympathy with the princes of the church. The Rev. 
Roy T. Brumbaugh, D.D., pastor of the First Church, Tacoma, Washington, 
and a member of the Independent Board, was forced to leave his church 
building and with over five hundred members formed the First Independent 
Church of Tacoma. Kalamazoo Presbytery refused to receive the Rev. G. H. 
Snell from the Presbytery of Cincinnati because of his unwillingness to 
pledge support of the Board of Foreign Missions without qualification. 
The Permanent Judicial Commission of the General Assembly upheld the 
action of Lackawanna Presbytery in erasing the name of the Rev. Henry W. 
Coray from its roll because he had become a missionary of the 
Independent Board, and in interpreting his action as making him 
"independent" even though he did not declare himself "independent." The 
Judicial Commission of the Synod of Wisconsin upheld the Presbytery of 
Milwaukee in dissolving the pastoral relationship of the Rev. J. J. 
DeWaard because he refused to cease his criticism of the boards of the 
church, and it sustained Winnebago Presbytery in suspending the Rev. 
Arthur F. Perkins from the ministry because he had established an 
independent Bible camp and had criticized the boards. All of these 
actions made the terminus ad quem of the whole conflict certain. The 
members of the Independent Board would be suspended from the ministry 
and a new church organization would be launched as a result. The 
"machine" of the church was rolling along, crushing all opposition in 
its path and making the victory at the end a hollow one.

The inevitable took place, for in Syracuse, New York, in June, 1936, 
certain members of the Independent Board were suspended from the 
ministry of the Presbyterian Church in the USA. This action had been 
foreseen by the Covenant Union so that its first annual convention had 
been called for June 11-14, 1936, in Philadelphia. To this gathering 
came delegates from thirteen states who realized what the meeting meant 
and were prepared for action. The Covenant Union was dissolved and on 
the afternoon of June 11, 1936, thirty-four ministers, seventeen ruling 
elders, and seventy-nine laymen signed an act of association and 
doctrinal statement.[13]

The ministers and elders then constituted themselves the general 
assembly of the Presbyterian Church of America. The Rev. J. Gresham 
Machen, D.D., who had led the conflict against unbelief, was elected 
moderator without a dissenting vote, and the long-awaited, 
long-prophesied parting of the ways between Bible-believers and the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA became a reality.

The first general assembly of the Presbyterian Church of America was 
concerned largely with the election of committees which would prepare 
the necessary organization of the church in readiness for the next 
assembly, which was called for November 12-15, 1936. On the other hand, 
several important and far-reaching decisions were made which stamped the 
Presbyterian Church of America as thoroughly Calvinistic in its doctrine 
and fair in its recognition of the rights of congregations to retain 
their local properties.

A Committee on the Constitution was elected with the power to recommend 
the adoption of the Westminster Confession of Faith, the Larger and 
Shorter Catechisms, and the elimination from these standards of the 1903 
amendments and the Declaratory Statement.[14] The changes in the 
Confession of Faith of the Presbyterian Church in the USA which were 
made in 1903 and which were discussed in chapter one, impaired the 
church's testimony to the Bible and the Reformed faith.

A resolution with reference to church property grew out of the unfair 
practice of the Presbyterian Church in the USA in claiming all church 
property for the denomination, even though the church building had been 
erected and paid for by the local congregation. Each local church under 
this provision is allowed to retain its property, which shall only 
revert to the Presbyterian Church of America if the congregation becomes 
extinct.[15] Committees on home missions and Christian education were 
also elected.

Another action was taken making the decisions of the General Assembly of 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA regarding the members of the 
Independent Board invalid. In part, it read,

    All censures inflicted by courts of the Presbyterian Church in the 
U.S.A., upon any of the defendants in judicial Cases 1-5 mentioned above 
who are now connected with this church, are by the action of this 
Assembly, as the supreme judicatory of this church, terminated, lifted, 
and declared at an end.[16]

One outstanding characteristic marked the first general assembly of the 
Presbyterian Church of America. It was a truly deliberative body where 
every commissioner had an equal opportunity to express his opinion and 
where lively debate preceded each action. There was no attempt to shut 
off discussion, to call for the previous question, and to use all sorts 
of parliamentary tricks to force motions to a vote. When a matter had 
been thoroughly considered, each man voted according to his convictions, 
unafraid of any recriminatory measures later by a coterie of 
office-holders and office-seekers.

Immediately following the first general assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church of America, congregations and ministers began to leave the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, the Knox Presbyterian Church, 
Philadelphia, being the first to unite with the new body. Within two 
months after the new body had been formed, seventy-five ministers were 
under its jurisdiction, nine presbyteries had been erected (California, 
the Dakotas, Iowa, the Northwest, New Jersey, New York and New England, 
Ohio, Philadelphia, and Wisconsin), and there were congregations or 
groups of the Presbyterian Church of America meeting for worship in 
California, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maine, 
Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North 
Dakota, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Washington, Wisconsin, 
and the District of Columbia.[17]

Even before the Presbyterian Church of America was formed, it was 
certain that the Presbyterian Church in the USA intended to continue its 
persecution of the Independent Board members even though they were in 
another church body. The Christ Reformed Episcopal Church, 43rd and 
Chestnut Streets, Philadelphia, had extended the courtesy of the use of 
its building to the Covenant Union for its evening meetings during the 
convention of June 11-14. To prevent this and to persuade the Reformed 
Episcopal Church to cancel the contract with the Covenant Union, the 
Rev. Lewis S. Mudge, D.D., stated clerk of the General Assembly, and the 
Rev. George Emerson Barnes, D.D., moderator of Philadelphia Presbytery 
of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, appeared before the vestry and 
actually convinced it that to allow the former ministers of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA to use the Reformed Episcopal Church 
building would be to violate comity relations between the Reformed 
Episcopal Church and the Presbyterian Church in the USA.[18] However, 
the Reformed Episcopal Church of the Atonement in Germantown offered its 
auditorium to the Presbyterian Church of America, and a telegram of 
greeting was read to the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of 
America from the Rev. Robert Westly Peach, presiding bishop of the 
Reformed Episcopal Church.

In an almost ludicrous session of the Philadelphia Presbytery of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, the five minister members of the 
Independent Board, who had been ordered suspended from the ministry of 
that church by the General Assembly, were formally ordered suspended, 
even though these men had already renounced the jurisdiction of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA and so were no longer members of it. The 
same procedure was reenacted by the Presbytery of New Brunswick in the 
case of Dr. Machen. And to make the whole proceeding even more 
ridiculous, five ministers, the Rev. A. A. MacRae, the Rev. Ned B. 
Stonehouse, the Rev. Robert Moody Holmes, the Rev. Albert B. Dodd, D.D., 
and the Rev. David Freeman, all of whom had renounced the jurisdiction 
of the Presbyterian Church in the USA and had joined the Presbyterian 
Church of America, were ordered to face trial before the Presbytery of 
Philadelphia.[19]

The full force of vindictiveness against the Presbyterian Church of 
America on the part of the Presbyterian Church in the USA was yet to 
come. On August 13, 1936, just two months after the formation of the 
Presbyterian Church of America, a bill of complaint in equity was filed 
in the Court of Common Pleas No. 5 in Philadelphia by Henry B. Master, 
moderator of the General Assembly, Lewis S. Mudge, stated clerk of the 
General Assembly, et al., claiming to represent the Presbyterian Church 
in the USA versus J. Gresham Machen, Paul Woolley, et al., and all 
officers and members of the Presbyterian Church of America, asking the 
court to enjoin the defendant church from using the name on the ground 
of its similarity to that of the Presbyterian Church in the USA.[20]

On April 28, 1937, the hearing began in the Court of Common Pleas No. 5 
before the Honorable Frank Smith. The plaintiff's arguments fell under 
three heads. First, the Presbyterian Church in the USA was by general 
consent the largest and most representative Presbyterian Church in the 
United States. It had invested millions and millions of dollars in 
buildings and organizations, and these had to be protected. Secondly, in 
a proposed union between the Presbyterian Church in the USA and the 
United Presbyterian Church of North America, the name "The Presbyterian 
Church of America" had been mentioned as the one for the united church. 
Thirdly, the Presbyterian Church in the USA had carried on happy comity 
relations with many churches, and it would be unfortunate if the 
Presbyterian Church of America should enter these areas with a 
competitive spirit and by a misleading name confuse its identity in the 
minds of the public.

To prove that the Presbyterian Church of America had been confused with 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA in the mind of the general public, 
one letter and one telegram were produced which had been mailed by a 
newspaper office to the Presbyterian Church of America and incorrectly 
addressed to the office of the stated clerk of the General Assembly of 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA.[21]

In answer to these arguments, the defendants stated: First, while the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA is the largest Presbyterian body in the 
United States, it is not the Presbyterian Church and has no more right 
to the name "Presbyterian" than any of the other ten or more churches in 
America using that descriptive title. "Presbyterian" designates a 
certain form of doctrine and church government developed by John Calvin 
and others, so that any body conforming to this well-accepted historical 
type of church is qualified to use the word "Presbyterian" in its title. 
Furthermore, there is no such thing as property rights in the future 
contributions of members of any church. It is a totalitarian conception 
of the church that members of evangelical churches must support the 
official agencies of the church to the utmost of their ability.

In the second place, the proposed union between the Presbyterian Church 
in the USA and the United Presbyterian Church of North America, which 
was to use the name was voted down by the United Presbyterian Church 
years ago and any attempt to revive this movement would have to be 
started de novo. Certainly, it was misleading to create the impression 
that a proposed union which was defeated warranted the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA in preempting the name Presbyterian Church of America. 
In fact, such an implication was absurd.

In the third place, the argument against proselytizing struck at the 
very heart of religious freedom in the United States. Even Dr. Mudge had 
to admit on the witness stand that he would urge the Presbyterian Church 
in the USA to proselytize among Unitarians.[22] Every church has a right 
under the constitution of the United States to proselytize. At this 
point it is well to note that the judge in the case refused to allow the 
introduction of evidence by expert theologians to prove that a 
fundamental difference in doctrinal belief caused the members of the 
defendant church to withdraw from the plaintiff body. Therefore, argued 
the defendants, since the great doctrinal conflict which separated the 
two churches could not be introduced, only one valid issue remained, 
namely, the question of confusion of the names in the minds of the 
general public. This hearing took place nearly a year after the 
defendant church had been organized, and yet the plaintiffs could only 
produce two pieces of evidence of mistaken identity. This was no 
positive proof that any state of confusion existed. On the other hand, 
the defendants cited many secular and religious papers to demonstrate 
that no obscurity or confusion whatsoever obtained in the minds of the 
writers.[23]

The court handed down a decision on June 27, 1938, in favor of the 
plaintiff church.[24] The defendants gave notice of appeal to the State 
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, but the appeal was not taken. On February 
9, 1939, at a specially called Fifth General Assembly, the Presbyterian 
Church of America adopted the name "The Orthodox Presbyterian Church," 
and the suit was terminated.[25]

The Second General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of America in 
November, 1936, only five months after the formation of the church, was 
held in order to adopt a Confession of Faith and so provide an adequate 
doctrinal basis for the new body. It claimed to be the "spiritual 
succession" of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, so that the 
Westminster Confession of Faith would logically be its doctrinal 
confession. However, in 1903 certain changes and additions had been made 
to the Westminster Confession of Faith by the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA, which changes toned down the biblical and Calvinistic witness of 
the Confession, and these had to be eliminated if the Presbyterian 
Church of America were to continue in the true tradition of the Reformed 
faith.[26] Therefore the Committee on the Constitution was given power 
"to recommend the elimination, from that form of these Standards [The 
Westminster Confession of Faith], of the changes made in the year of our 
Lord 1903." The committee did recommend the adoption of the Westminster 
Confession of Faith with the elimination of most of the 1903 amendments, 
but with the retention of two small changes in chapter XXII concerning 
oaths, and chapter XXV, section Vl, which designates the pope as the 
antichrist.[27] By an overwhelming majority the recommendation of the 
committee was adopted.[28]

Another subject already discussed in chapter four developed into the 
central issue of that assembly, namely, the question of modern 
dispensationalism and premillennialism. As has been stated, professor R. 
B. Kuiper of Westminster Theological Seminary had written an article, 
"Why Separation Was Necessary," which first appeared in The Banner 
(Christian Reformed), and was reprinted in the Presbyterian Guardian of 
September 12, 1936. The section which received the most attention read,

    It would have warmed the cockles of the heart of any Christian 
Reformed minister to hear how closely they [candidates for ordination at 
general assembly] were questioned about the two errors which are so 
extremely prevalent among American fundamentalists, Arminianism and the 
Dispensationalism of the Scofield Bible. The Assembly wanted to make 
sure that these prospective ministers were not tainted with such 
anti-reformed heresies.

Prior to this, professor John Murray of Westminster Theological Seminary 
had been discussing "The Reformed Faith and Modern Substitutes" in a 
series of articles appearing in the Presbyterian Guardian on the general 
themes of Arminianism and modern dispensationalism. One article in 
particular was given over to this latter subject.

    In entering upon an exposition of what we called "Modern 
Dispensationalism," and the establishment of our thesis that it 
contradicts the teaching of the standards of the Reformed Faith, in 
particular those of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., it is 
necessary to remind our readers that we have no objection to the word 
"dispensation," nor to the idea of designating the various periods that 
may and must be distinguished in the divine economy of the history of 
the world as distinct "dispensations." What we are intent upon showing 
is that the system of interpretation widely prevalent in this country, 
and set forth, for example, in the Scofield Reference Bible and in the 
books of various Bible teachers of prominence, is palpably inconsistent 
with the system of truth embodied in our Presbyterian standards.[29]

It is well to take cognizance of the fact that the word "premillennial," 
or reference to premillennialism, does not occur in either professor 
Kuiper's or professor Murray's articles. Mr. Murray made it clear 
that...

    The "Dispensationalism" of which we speak as heterodox from the 
standpoint of the Reformed Faith is that form of interpretation, widely 
popular at the present time, which discovers in the several 
dispensations of God's redemptive revelation distinct and even contrary 
principles of divine procedure and thus destroys the unity of God's 
dealings with fallen mankind.[30]

Furthermore, Dr. Machen emphasized that as such the premillennial view 
of the return of Christ, namely, that Jesus Christ "will return before a 
thousand-year period held to be mentioned in the Book of Revelation, 
that during that period He will reign upon this earth, and that after 
that period will come the final judgment," was not being attacked. In 
fact, he pointed out definitely,

    Can a person who holds the premillennial view be a true Calvinist; 
can he, in other words, hold truly to the Calvinistic or Reformed system 
of doctrine which is set forth in the Westminster Standards? We think 
that he can; and for that reason we think that Premillennialists as well 
as those who hold the opposing view may become ministers or elders or 
deacons in The Presbyterian Church of America.[31]

In spite of all these precautions and carefully worded statements 
safeguarding the liberty of view of the individual minister and 
congregation with respect to the return of our Lord, the Christian 
Beacon, edited by the Rev. Carl McIntire, pastor of the then Independent 
Presbyterian Church, Collingswood, New Jersey, and a minister of the 
Presbyterian Church of America, carried an editorial on October 1, 1936, 
claiming that attacks were being made upon premillennialists, as 
especially manifested in professor Kuiper's article, "Why Separation Was 
Necessary." Mr. McIntire insisted that "The remark in regard to the 
'Dispensationalism of the Scofield Bible' is an attack upon the 
premillennialists, as heretics." Professor Kuiper replied to the 
editorial, but Mr. McIntire refused to publish it. Among other things 
professor Kuiper stated in his reply,

    It is a matter of common knowledge that there is ever so much more 
to the dispensationalism of the Scofield Bible than the mere teaching of 
Premillennialism. Nor do the two stand and fall together. There are 
premillennarians who have never heard of Scofield's dispensations. More 
important than that, there are serious students of God's Word who hold 
to the premillennial return of Christ and emphatically reject Scofield's 
system of dispensations as fraught with grave error.[32]

The Presbyteries of California and New Jersey overtured the General 
Assembly, asking that some declaratory statement be adopted setting 
forth "eschatological liberty" in the church.[33] The assembly did not 
adopt such a declaration, nor write such a statement into its 
constitution, as the Presbytery of California demanded, because members 
of the assembly believed that such liberty already existed within the 
constitution of the church.

But another question began to absorb the attention of the Presbyterian 
Church of America, namely, that of Christian liberty. In numerous 
private and public utterances, Westminster Seminary and its faculty were 
attacked as an institution and a faculty which encouraged its students 
to drink fermented beverages. The source of such baseless attacks 
appeared to be those who were followers of the Rev. Carl McIntire and 
supporters of the Christian Beacon.

Dr. J. Oliver Buswell published several volumes at this time, one of 
which, The Christian Life, dealt with the subject of Christian liberty 
and worldliness. The thesis that moderate drinking inevitably leads to 
drunkenness is defended rather strongly, and total abstinence is upheld 
as the requirement in this matter for Christians.

In order to answer these charges, an editorial appeared in the 
Presbyterian Guardian stating the historic Presbyterian position 
concerning the subject of Christian liberty.[34] The Bible was set forth 
as the only rule of faith and morals and as the only guide to right 
conduct. There must be no appeal to the rules of men unless they agree 
with the Word of God. Certain things are expressly forbidden in the 
Bible, while other calls to duty are by "good and necessary consequence" 
deduced from the Scriptures. Every Christian must obey these injunctions 
and if he does not, he is engaging in sinful practice. On the other 
hand, certain things either expressly or through silence are regarded by 
the Bible as indifferent in themselves. Engaging in these practices is a 
matter of the individual's Christian liberty. He must be guided by the 
circumstances in expressing his Christian liberty, always keeping in 
mind the weaker brother and the high standard of holiness set by the 
Word of God. The editorial then continued to deal with the particular 
problem of the use of wine.

The principle enunciated was that, according to the Bible, it is not 
wrong at any and all times to partake temperately of wine. The Bible 
condemns intemperance, but clearly it allows the moderate use of wine 
under certain conditions. The editorial concluded with the warning, "In 
every instance we must keep before us the goal of the salvation and the 
edification of men's souls through our testimony to Christ. And let us 
take care that our testimony to Christ be to the Christ of the Bible. 
Jesus said, 'Blessed is he, whosoever shall find no occasion of 
stumbling in me!"'

This issue came to a climax in the Presbyterian Church of America at the 
third general assembly. Three overtures to the assembly recommended 
total abstinence as the principle to maintain, while a fourth warned the 
assembly against man-made rules and urged the church to re-study the 
subordinate standards of the church, particularly the Larger and Shorter 
Catechisms, as containing the principles of holy Scripture which is the 
guide to godly living. The three overtures relative to total abstinence 
were defeated, and the fourth overture was adopted directing the 
attention of the church to the Westminster Standards as containing 
sufficient and adequate instruction on this subject.[35]

The question of independency in church government also became a live 
issue in the third assembly as it related to support of the Independent 
Board. The church had organized a committee on foreign missions, but 
because most of its missionary volunteers had been sent out to the 
foreign field under the Independent Board, the foreign committee had 
always recommended the support of the Independent Board.

In the fall of 1936, however, a disruption had taken place in the 
Independent Board over the question of church government. The pledge of 
the Independent Board requires approval of the charter of the board, 
which charter in section III demands a belief in the "fundamental 
principles of Presbyterian church government." After the 1936 General 
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, there began to develop a 
pronounced tendency toward independency in church government on the part 
of some members. The November, 1936 meeting of the Independent Board 
produced a clash over this issue.

Dr. Machen had been president of the board since its founding, but now 
certain members of the board had grown discontented with his policy of 
preserving the board's Presbyterian character and doctrine. These 
members had met before the meeting of the board and had decided to 
attempt to remove Dr. Machen from the presidency. The discontented 
members placed an ecclesiastically independent member in nomination for 
president, and he was elected. Thus a non-Presbyterian point of view had 
gained control of the board and its original purpose to support "truly 
Biblical and truly Presbyterian" foreign missions was abandoned.

Another example of this spirit of independency among board members was 
the Rev. Merrill T. MacPherson, vice-president of the Independent Board, 
who formed an independent church known as the Church of the Open Door of 
Philadelphia in June, 1936. Its constitution, article VII, section 1, 
forbids any relationship with a denomination.

    This Church acknowledges only the Lord Jesus Christ as its Head; the 
Holy Scriptures as the only infallible guide on matters of faith, 
discipline and order; the Holy Spirit as its Teacher; and is not and 
never shall be amenable to or under the jurisdiction or supervision of 
any other ecclesiastical body of any kind or nature whatever.

Mr. MacPherson has since frequently stated that he has no desire or 
intention of uniting with any denomination. This spirit of independency 
was not manifest when he first became a member of the board and while he 
was pastor of the Central-North Broad Street Presbyterian Church. There 
were others on the Independent Board who also showed tendencies in the 
same direction.

Certain members of the board attempted to remedy this situation and to 
compel the board to remain true to its charter, but they failed and 
resigned from the board.[36] This left the Independent Board in 
opposition to the great Presbyterian purpose for which it had been 
founded. These resignations from the Independent Board caused the Third 
General Assembly to adopt a resolution urging the church not to support 
it.[37] A minority report was also presented in which the allegation of 
independency in church government was denied, and a plea for support of 
the Independent Board by the Presbyterian Church of America was entered.

As a result of these differences concerning dispensationalism, Christian 
liberty, and church government, fourteen ministers and three elders 
withdrew from the Presbyterian Church of America and formed the Bible 
Presbyterian Synod. The synod immediately announced its intention to 
revise the three hundred-year-old Westminster Confession of Faith "in 
any particulars in which the premillennial teaching of the Scriptures 
may be held to be obscured."[38]

The First General Synod of the Bible Presbyterian Synod took definite 
steps to alter the Westminster Confession of Faith so that it would 
express the premillennial view. Changes were made in chapters VIII, 
XXXII, XXXIII, and XXXIV in the Confession of Faith, and in questions 
eighty-two, and eighty-four through ninety of the Larger Catechism, in 
order to make them conform to premillennialism.[39] Thus, in a few 
months the three hundred-year-old Westminster Confession of Faith, which 
had been in harmony with the whole Presbyterian and Reformed tradition 
concerning the second coming of Jesus Christ, was hastily changed to 
conform exclusively to premillennialism.

The Fourth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of America was 
concerned largely with the adoption of a form of government. The form of 
government finally adopted is essentially that which has been used by 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA for over one hundred years. In 
several instances, however, changes were made in order to guard against 
the strong tendency of centralization which had dominated the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA during the last decade. The powers of the 
presbyteries over the congregations and the powers of the general 
assembly over the church were limited. The general assembly's powers 
which had been so abused in the Presbyterian Church in the USA were 
restricted in this way:

    Whenever such deliverances, resolutions, overtures and other actions 
are additional to the specific provisions of the Constitution, they 
shall not be regarded as binding unless they have been approved by the 
general assembly and presbyteries in the manner provided in this Form of 
Government for the amendment of the Constitution.[40]

Several other minor changes were made, providing that baptized infants 
should be placed on the membership roll of the church;[41] that only 
communicant members of the church may vote in congregational 
meetings;[42] and that amendments to the form of subscription required 
of ministers, licentiates, ruling elders, and deacons must go through 
same procedure as changes in the Confession of Faith and Catechisms.[43]

The other amendments are of a very minor nature.

The Fifth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of America voted 
not to continue the suit concerning the name of the church and adopted 
the name, "the Orthodox Presbyterian Church."

The Directory for the Public Worship of God was adopted by the Orthodox 
Presbyterian Church at the Sixth General Assembly in May, 1939. It 
contains the same principles as the one in use by the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA but yet differs from that directory in several 
important features. First, it only includes forms for the public worship 
of God and so no burial service, or form for the visitation of the sick 
is found. Second, an entire new chapter was added on the principles of 
public worship, and suggested forms which are not part of the directory 
were proposed for the celebration of the Lord's Supper, public 
profession of faith, ordinations, and installations. Third, a few 
changes which are minor but nevertheless significant concern the 
pronouncement of the apostolic benediction only at regular services of 
worship, the use of hymns which are in agreement with the Word of God, 
the celebration of the sacrament only in the church building except in 
rare cases approved by the session, and the public profession of faith 
before the congregation.[44] A Book of Discipline has been provisionally 
adopted and is likely to be adopted finally in the next general assembly 
of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church in June, 1940.

In the formation of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church, Calvinism was 
given a new impetus in America. The spiritual heritage of Reformed 
teaching which had been stifled in the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
received a welcome in this church body, and the great doctrines of the 
Reformation, such as the sovereignty of God and salvation by grace 
alone, came to life again. Upon this high biblical ground the Orthodox 
Presbyterian Church stands, convinced that God will be pleased to use 
her to his glory and to the advancement of his kingdom. The original 
purpose and determination to make the church a truly biblical and truly 
Presbyterian body which would carry on the spiritual succession of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA was insured.

The Orthodox Presbyterian Church is what its name implies, truly 
Presbyterian. Its doctrinal standards, the Westminster Confession of 
Faith, and the Larger and Shorter Catechisms, are in practically the 
same form as they were when written by the Westminster divines nearly 
three hundred years ago. All compromise with modernism has been 
eliminated and strict adherence to the Presbyterian and Reformed 
traditions characterizes the testimony of the church. It is a church 
devoted to the Bible as the final authority for faith and practice and 
convinced that only through the sacrificial death of Christ upon the 
cross can men be saved.

It is too early to evaluate the importance of the Orthodox Presbyterian 
Church in the religious life of America, but it is safe to state 
emphatically that this church is true to the Word of God and is true to 
the great Presbyterian heritage handed down by the church fathers of 
American Presbyterianism. While many of the Protestant churches in 
America are floundering in the quagmire of modernism and its ministers 
are preaching man-made philosophies and moral essays based upon 
naturalism, here is one church which relies not upon itself and man's 
wisdom but trusts emphatically in the Bible as God's revelation to man 
and as containing God's plan of salvation for man. The Orthodox 
Presbyterian Church's ministers do not say, thus says so and so, or 
even, so says the church, but they speak above the clamor of men, "Thus 
saith the Lord, hear ye Him!"
