Chapter 4. Westminster Theological Seminary

WHEN THE General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA made the 
reorganization of Princeton Seminary final in June, 1929, certain former 
directors and faculty members of the seminary and a group of 
Presbyterian laymen and ministers, mostly from Philadelphia and 
vicinity, met to discuss the launching of another theological 
institution, Presbyterian in doctrine and of high scholarship, which 
would carry on the traditions of Princeton Seminary before its 
reorganization. The initial meeting took place on June 17, 1929, in New 
York City at the University Club by invitation of the Rev. Walter D. 
Buchanan, D.D., pastor of the Broadway Presbyterian Church, New York 
City. Presbyterians from five or six presbyteries who were present at 
this meeting passed the following resolution:

    Resolved, That this group will support the loyal members of the 
former Board of Directors of Princeton Theological Seminary in any step 
they may see fit to take (1) Toward preventing by legal means the misuse 
of the Seminary's funds or (2) Toward the formation of a new seminary if 
they decide that it is necessary.[1]

It was the Rev. Charles Schall, D.D., pastor of the Presbyterian Church, 
Wayne, Pennsylvania, who first conceived of the idea of a new seminary 
after the destruction of Princeton and started influences which made the 
idea a reality. He had luncheon with two elders in Philadelphia, T. E. 
Ross and F. M. Paist, and discovered that they and many other elders in 
Philadelphia were willing and eager to launch a new seminary in the fall 
of 1929 if that were possible. At the Arts Club in Philadelphia eight 
elders and Drs. Wilson, Machen, and Allis met for luncheon and discussed 
curriculum, professors, location, and a budget for the proposed 
seminary. Sufficient funds were pledged at that meeting for the first 
year's expenses to encourage further efforts to make the plans an 
actuality. Following this luncheon seventy-eight men, composed of former 
Princeton directors, faculty, and students, and Presbyterian ministers 
and elders, met at the central YMCA, Philadelphia, July 18, 1929, at 
which time a temporary executive committee was formed and the seminary 
was definitely launched.[2]

The executive committee chosen consisted of ministers: Maitland 
Alexander, Roy T. Brumbaugh, Walter D. Buchanan, Samuel G. Craig, 
Charles Schall, and Frank H. Stevenson, and elders: Roland K. Armes, 
Edgar Frutchey, Frederic M. Paist (chairman), James L. Rankin, T. Edward 
Ross, James F. Schrader, John L. Steele, and Morgan H. Thomas, with Drs. 
Robert Dick Wilson, J. Gresham Machen, and Oswald T. Allis in an 
advisory capacity. Westminster Theological Seminary was selected as the 
name for the new institution.

Among those who later joined the board of trustees, the name of the Rev. 
Clarence E. Macartney, D.D., a former moderator of the General Assembly 
of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, is the most prominent, although 
many others who were well-known pastors of large Presbyterian 
congregations and laymen of influential positions in the professional 
and business world also consented to serve. Westminster Seminary began 
its first academic year on September 25, 1929, with an enrollment of 
fifty students.

This meager description of the founding of the institution does not 
portray the faith, courage, work, and real heroism of that small band of 
men who actually launched the seminary in less than four months after 
the reorganization of Princeton. Drs. Wilson, Machen, and Allis spent 
the entire summer in speaking, writing articles, preparing the 
curriculum, securing professors, and carrying on a large correspondence 
in order to secure the opening of the institution in September of that 
year. The Rev. Paul Woolley, registrar, labored tirelessly in preparing 
the student rooms and the classrooms at 1528 Pine Street (which had been 
placed at the disposal of the school, rent free, by Dr. Allis), and in 
answering multitudinous questions about the new seminary. The laymen on 
the executive committee also did yeoman service, particularly in 
securing funds.

No report of the organization of Westminster would be proper without 
special mention of the tremendous work which was accomplished by the 
Rev. Frank H. Stevenson, D.D., who became president of the board of 
trustees, and who was the guiding spirit in the administrative policies 
of the seminary. His large experience as an executive served to prepare 
him in a peculiar way for the task of steering the ship through the 
rough seas of the worst financial depression that this country has ever 
seen, and which overtook America only one month after Westminster was 
founded. Much credit must be given to him for guiding the seminary in a 
remarkable way, so that the infant institution remained free of debt. It 
was he who had published the article, "A Pastor Looks at Princeton," 
which was one of the most incisive and well-written discussions of the 
entire controversy. He had been a member of the board of directors at 
Princeton and before that of Lane Theological Seminary in Cincinnati, as 
well as the successful pastor of the Church of the Covenant, Cincinnati. 
He came to his position as president of the board of trustees of the new 
seminary bearing the scars of battle and prepared for the task which 
confronted him. His untimely death at the age of fifty-one in 1934 was a 
severe blow to the young and struggling institution.

The faculty at Westminster Seminary was composed of four professors from 
Princeton: Robert Dick Wilson, who was chosen chairman of the faculty, 
J. Gresham Machen, Oswald T. Allis, and Cornelius Van Til; the Rev. R. 
B. Kuiper, who had been a graduate student at Princeton under B. B. 
Warfield, and a pastor in Reformed churches for nearly a quarter of a 
century, and three recent graduates of Princeton: Allan A. MacRae, Ned 
B. Stonehouse, and Paul Woolley, who had pursued graduate studies in 
Europe. A year later Mr. John Murray, who had taught at Princeton 
Seminary, joined the faculty.

Professor Robert Dick Wilson was considered to be an outstanding scholar 
in the Old Testament, especially in Semitic studies, and a great 
defender of the faith. Dr. J. Gresham Machen had come to be regarded as 
one of the leading exponents of historic Christianity. He, more than any 
one else, was the central figure of the controversy at Princeton and the 
theological leader of the conservatives. Dr. O. T. Allis had been the 
editor of the scholarly Princeton Theological Review, and in this 
position had gained an international reputation for his exact and 
thorough grasp of orthodox Christianity. Dr. Cornelius Van Til, who had 
taught only a year at Princeton in the department of apologetics, has 
since attained a place of prestige in that field of theology. Professor 
R. B. Kuiper now holds the chair of practical theology, and from his 
abundant experience in the pastorate and his unique gifts as a preacher, 
is teaching the young men to become faithful ministers of the Word of 
God. The four young men who were added to the faculty were brilliant 
students at Princeton and give promise of a large future in theological 
scholarship. Two others, the Rev. Edward J. Young and the Rev. John H. 
Skilton, were later made members of the faculty in the departments of 
Old and New Testament respectively.

Westminster Seminary is independent of ecclesiastical control, but it is 
not interdenominational or nondenominational in character, for it is 
committed to the Westminster Confession of Faith as the system of 
doctrine taught in the Bible and to the Presbyterian form of church 
government. Yet it welcomes students from many church bodies, and since 
the seminary was founded they have come from thirty-four different 
denominations.

Why was Westminster Theological Seminary founded? The catalogue of the 
institution states,

    Westminster Theological Seminary was founded in 1929 to carry on and 
perpetuate the policies and traditions of Princeton Seminary as that 
institution existed prior to its reorganization by the General Assembly 
of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.

    The need for the new seminary is due ultimately to a long process of 
defection from the Christian faith which has been going on in the 
Protestant churches of the world during the past one hundred years; but 
the special occasion was found in certain recent events in the 
Presbyterian Church in the United States of America.[3]

In an address at the opening exercises of Westminster, September 25, 
1929, Dr. Machen said among other things,

    No, my friends, though Princeton Seminary is dead, the noble 
tradition of Princeton Seminary is alive. Westminster Seminary will 
endeavor by God's grace to continue that tradition unimpaired; it will 
endeavor, not on a foundation of equivocation and compromise, but on an 
honest foundation of devotion to God's Word, to maintain the same 
principles that old Princeton maintained. We believe, first, that the 
Christian religion, as it is set forth in the Confession of Faith of the 
Presbyterian Church, is true; we believe, second, that the Christian 
religion welcomes and is capable of scholarly defense; and we believe, 
third, that the Christian religion should be proclaimed without fear or 
favor, and in clear opposition to whatever opposes it, whether within or 
without the church, as the only way of salvation for lost mankind.[4]

In this pronouncement Dr. Machen laid down the platform upon which the 
seminary appeals for support and upon which the professors teach.

Westminster Seminary, in other words, is more than a protest against the 
trend toward modernism at Princeton Seminary; more than an institution 
set for the defense of the gospel; and even more than a seminary to 
carry on the traditions and policies of the old Princeton. It is a 
lighthouse of Christian learning. The seminary and its graduates are 
fired with a zeal to teach and to preach that men must believe in the 
God of the Bible if they are to know God as their heavenly Father, and 
if they are to have a consistent, logical, and reasonable view of the 
world. The seminary assumes the offensive in the warfare against 
paganism in its many forms. It is not content to find a way of escape 
from intellectual difficulties in religion by succumbing to the modern 
day emphasis upon individual experience as the norm for Christian 
thinking and living. On the other hand, by painstaking, accurate, and 
thorough scholarship it ventures to maintain that the Bible is true, 
that the Christian gospel is the power of God unto salvation, and that 
the Christian position is the only intellectually honest one.

The seminary's short history has demonstrated that the founders were 
determined to keep the institution devoted to the Westminster Confession 
as the system of doctrine taught in the Bible and to the Presbyterian 
form of church government. The professors have always taught the 
students to preach the gospel and to be equally vigilant in maintaining 
it in the councils of the church. As a result of this consistent 
teaching, the seminary has been much attacked, and two crises have 
developed within its board of trustees and faculty.

When the seminary came into being, much was said and written about the 
main conflict between paganism and Christianity, and little by 
comparison was stated concerning the Presbyterian character of 
Westminster and the need for upholding the full and consistent view of 
Christianity as set forth in Calvinism. Men like Dr. Machen made it 
abundantly plain that Westminster was not only orthodox, but definitely 
Reformed in its doctrinal basis. On the other hand, the general defense 
against modernism placed the conflict on a broader basis, and the 
distinctively Calvinistic character of Westminster was not strongly 
emphasized. A glance at the past ten years of Westminster Seminary will 
show that the failure to keep foremost the high biblical stand of the 
institution as a seminary of the Reformed persuasion led to serious 
misunderstandings.

When Westminster was organized three different groups of men were 
appointed to the board of trustees. No one knew at the time that this 
situation obtained, but the ensuing events have made it evident.

First, there were thorough-going Presbyterians who were resolved to 
maintain true doctrine regardless of cost. These men were ministers and 
laymen of the Presbyterian Church in the USA who felt the need of making 
a good witness for the gospel, not only from the pulpits of the church 
but also in the meetings of presbyteries, synods, and general 
assemblies. They were aware of the presence of ministers in the church 
who controlled much of its ecclesiastical life and who were opposed to 
the Westminster Confession of Faith. Consequently, the seminary had been 
formed, at least in one respect, with the hope of sending consecrated 
and courageous young men into the ministry of the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA to stem the rising tide of unbelief. This group of trustees, as 
well as members of the faculty, was convinced that if that course 
failed, true Presbyterianism must be preserved in some other way.

A second group in the board of trustees and faculty, also ministers and 
laymen of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, was equally determined to 
supply loyal ministers for the church, but, as it developed, they were 
not willing to pay the price of pursuing another course of continuing a 
true witness to the Reformed faith if the first method of reforming the 
church failed.

A third group in the board of trustees was composed of ministers and 
laymen of the same church who were opposed to modernism in the church 
and wanted to train faithful ministers of the Word of God. These members 
were non-denominational in their convictions rather than definitely 
Presbyterian. At the outset all members of the Board appeared to be of 
the same mind with the first group, but the two crises which developed 
required decisions, and the above divisions appeared.

Efforts were made in 1933, particularly by certain members of the 
faculty of whom Dr. Machen was the leader, and members of the board of 
trustees of the seminary, to reform the Board of Foreign Missions of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA.[5] When these efforts failed, a mission 
society, independent of ecclesiastical control and named the Independent 
Board for Presbyterian Foreign Missions, was formed. Three members of 
the faculty and nine members of the board of trustees of the seminary 
became members of that mission society. The General Assembly of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA issued a mandate in 1934 ordering members 
of the Presbyterian Church in the USA to resign from the Independent 
Board or suffer discipline. The members of the seminary faculty and 
board of trustees refused to resign from the Independent Board. This 
created dissension within the seminary family because some of the 
seminary board and one member of the faculty, led by Dr. Samuel G. 
Craig, felt that the Independent Board and Westminster Seminary should 
continue as separate institutions, and that sympathy with the seminary 
did not mean agreement with the establishment of the Independent Board. 
On the other hand, men like Dr. Machen were convinced that while the 
seminary and Independent Board were separate and distinct organizations, 
nevertheless the seminary's whole life and purpose were in hearty 
agreement with the attempt to reform the church and with the 
establishment of the Independent Board. In fact, Dr. Machen and the 
others argued that to take any other position would be to defeat the 
very reason for the organization of the seminary. If the seminary did 
not stand like a flint against the encroachments of modernism and 
unbelief in the church and was not willing to encourage its graduates to 
take the consequences of such a position, then the institution had no 
reason to exist.

The Rev. Samuel G. Craig, D.D., was editor of Christianity Today, which 
journal had been launched in May, 1930, when The Presbyterian, of which 
Dr. Craig had been editor, asked him to resign because of his vigorous 
protests against the reorganization of Princeton Seminary. The masthead 
of the first issue of Christianity Today declared it as "A Presbyterian 
Journal Devoted to Stating, Defending and Furthering the Gospel in the 
Modern World," and the editorial in the same issue stated among other 
things as its conviction, "that it is the duty of Christians to bear 
clear-cut witness to the Christian faith against all who oppose it, 
whether within or without the church." Contrary to this avowed purpose, 
so it seemed to Dr. Machen and many others, the paper had later on 
vigorously opposed the work of reformation within the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, as represented by the Independent Board and the 
Presbyterian Constitutional Covenant Union.[6] Consequently, the 
seminary had to make its position clear as to which group, Dr. Craig and 
his followers or the faculty, represented the seminary's attitude in the 
church crisis.

At the regular fall meeting of the board of trustees held on October 22, 
1935, the faculty presented a resolution asking the board to declare its 
position: was the seminary to continue in the vanguard of the gospel and 
the fight against modernism, or was it to lag in the rear of the battle 
and carry on the struggle in word only? The board finally upheld the 
faculty and voted to urge all those on the board opposed to the faculty 
to resign in order to allow the institution to continue.[7]

It is evident from this unique and generous resolution that it was the 
desire of those members of the board of trustees who were opposed to the 
faculty to preserve the witness of the seminary, rather than to have 
their opinion prevail and force most of the faculty to resign. Dr. O. T. 
Allis, a member of the faculty, was out of agreement with the other 
members of the faculty and resigned, stating, "I am taking this step 
voluntarily in the hope that the Seminary may be saved or at least be 
enabled to continue."[8]

Dr. Craig was the only member of the board of trustees who opposed this 
action in a vigorous way, and in order to make his protest formal he 
sent a long letter to each member of the board setting forth his reasons 
for disagreeing with the faculty. He presented five considerations which 
led him to vote against Dr. Macartney's resolution and that of the 
faculty. (1) It misstates the occasion and purpose of the establishment 
of Westminster Seminary. (2) It misstates the cause of the division that 
has been introduced into the affairs of the seminary. (3) It 
misrepresents the present editorial policy of Christianity Today and the 
present attitude of its editor. (4) It demands that the seminary 
identify its interests with those of the Independent Board and the 
Presbyterian Constitutional Covenant Union. (5) It contains a threat to 
wreck the seminary unless the demand just referred to is granted.[9]

At a specially called meeting of the board on January 7, 1936, thirteen 
members of the board and Dr. O. T. Allis of the faculty presented their 
resignations, and a statement was adopted by the board for release to 
the papers, which declared that the seminary would pursue its original 
purpose and policy of teaching and defending the Word of God.[10]

The Alumni Association of the seminary came to the defense of the 
institution and at its annual meeting on May 11, 1936, passed without a 
dissenting vote the resolution: "The Alumni Association hereby records 
its hearty approval of the present administration and policy of 
Westminster Theological Seminary."[11]

The departure of these thirteen members of the board of trustees and one 
member of the faculty was a serious loss to the seminary. It is a matter 
of regret that these men, some of whom were the conservative leaders of 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA and men of large abilities, were 
unwilling to go the whole way in the attempt to reform the church. It is 
to be hoped that they will eventually see their mistake and once more 
support the seminary in a wholehearted fashion.

This ended the first great crisis in the life of Westminster and stamped 
it as an institution which would brook no compromise with modernism, and 
which was resolved to instill in the students a militant and aggressive 
attitude against unbelief in the councils of the church as well as from 
the pulpit. The original purpose of the seminary had been upheld and its 
consistent testimony to the truth had been kept clear.

A second crisis within the board of trustees and the faculty occurred in 
1937. This time it concerned the question of the distinctively 
Presbyterian character of the institution. Was it to be only a generally 
evangelical seminary, or was it to continue its original principles and 
stand for Presbyterianism, or Calvinism, as the system of doctrine 
taught in the Bible?

Mr. John Murray, professor of systematic theology at the seminary, began 
a series of articles on the general theme, "The Reformed Faith and 
Modern Substitutes," in the December 16, 1935, issue of the Presbyterian 
Guardian. In this series, which extended over a number of months, he 
dealt with such subjects as "The Limited Atonement," "Arminianism," 
"Total Depravity," and "Modern Dispensationalism." In considering the 
last named topic, he attempted to prove that dispensationalism of the 
Scofield Reference Bible type contradicts the teaching of the 
Westminster Confession of Faith. He exposed the false distinction 
between the kingdom of God and the kingdom of heaven in the New 
Testament made by Dr. Lewis Chafer, which implies that entrance into the 
kingdom of God is by the new birth, while entrance into the kingdom of 
heaven is by works. Mr. Murray made it plain that premillennialism as 
such was not under discussion, but simply some of the errors which had 
become attached to it.[12]

Dr. O. T. Allis, a member of the faculty, also wrote an article on this 
subject in The Evangelical Quarterly for January, 1936, defending the 
same point of view as that expressed by Mr. Murray. Another article 
added to the emphasis on this subject. After the First General Assembly 
of the Presbyterian Church of America, now the Orthodox Presbyterian 
Church, professor R. B. Kuiper wrote a description of the formation of 
the church for The Banner (Christian Reformed), which was reprinted in 
the Presbyterian Guardian, in which he stated,

    The General Assembly had the privilege of examining several 
graduates of Westminster Seminary for licensure and ordination. It would 
have warmed the cockles of the heart of any Christian Reformed minister 
to hear how closely they were questioned about the two errors which are 
so extremely prevalent among American fundamentalists, Arminianism and 
the Dispensationalism of the Scofield Bible. The assembly wanted to make 
sure that these prospective ministers were not tainted with such 
anti-reformed heresies.[13]

These articles brought protests from certain members of the board of 
trustees of the seminary and a number of good people who had supported 
Westminster under the impression that it was a non-denominational 
institution. In fact, it was the knowledge that the thoroughgoing 
Calvinistic principles of the seminary were not sufficiently well-known 
which prompted the articles to be written by Mr. Murray. The criticisms 
which followed revealed only too clearly that the fears of the seminary 
leaders were well-grounded.

Another issue, quite irrelevant to the whole question and which obscured 
the real basic differences of doctrine, was the subject of Christian 
liberty, particularly concerning the drinking of fermented beverages, 
and the discussion of the so-called separated life, which sets up 
certain man-made standards apart from the Bible and judges a Christian's 
spirituality by his conformity to these norms.[14]

Professor Allan A. MacRae, Ph.D., assistant professor in charge of the 
department of Old Testament at the seminary, sympathized strongly with 
these criticisms and sent in his resignation to the board of trustees, 
in which he stated that the teaching at Westminster Seminary was now 
directed against fundamentalism and premillennialism instead of 
modernism, that the faculty vigorously defended the use of fermented 
beverages, that the students were being taught to accept views in 
opposition "to the great stream of Reformed, Evangelical Christianity in 
this country,"[15] and that the seminary had "passed into the hands of a 
small alien group." Ministers Roy Talmage Brumbaugh and Harold S. Laird, 
and elders Roland K. Armes and F. M. Paist resigned from the board of 
trustees for the same reasons.[16]

In protest, the above-named trustees and the Rev. Carl McIntire, with 
Dr. MacRae as chairman of the faculty, formed Faith Theological Seminary 
at Wilmington, Delaware, in September, 1937, which seminary is wedded to 
premillennialism and the so-called separated life. The seminary claims 
to be committed to Presbyterian doctrine, but the presence on the board 
of trustees of one Baptist, the Rev. David Otis Fuller, D.D., of Grand 
Rapids, Michigan, and one independent fundamentalist, the Rev. William 
R. McCarrell, D.D., of Cicero, Illinois, makes it clear that the 
institution is an inter-denominational one.[17]

The unwarranted attack by Dr. MacRae brought a quick response from the 
faculty and the students of Westminster Seminary, both of whom denied 
the allegations of intemperance at the institution and the statement 
that the seminary denied liberty of view with respect to the second 
coming of Christ.[18]

This division in the board of trustees and the faculty resulted in the 
Presbyterian and biblical witness of the seminary being firmly 
maintained. Fortunately, the seminary weathered the storm and continued 
on its course as an institution devoted to the Westminster Confession of 
Faith as the system of doctrine taught in the Bible, and more determined 
than ever to pursue its original purpose of teaching young men to insist 
upon loyalty to the Word of God in the administration of the church, as 
well as in proclaiming it each Sunday from the sacred desk.

The attack on Westminster Seminary from without was more bitter and very 
widespread. The hierarchy of the Presbyterian Church in the USA exerted 
tremendous efforts to still the voice of the institution. On August 1, 
1934, the general council of the Presbyterian Church in the USA sent a 
letter to all ministers and sessions of that church, signed by the 
moderator of the preceding general assembly, and stating among other 
things that "The Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign Missions is 
a continuation of a divisive movement in the Presbyterian Church which 
five years ago resulted in the establishment of an independent seminary 
and which, if not stayed, will result in the formation of other 
independent Presbyterian agencies." The import of this is evident: 
Westminster Seminary is a harmful divisive movement which is threatening 
the future of the Presbyterian church.

This official letter is moderate in comparison with other and more 
drastic measures which were taken to suppress Westminster. For example, 
Mr. Calvin Cummings, a graduate of the seminary, was denied licensure in 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA because he refused to pledge blind 
allegiance to the official Board of Foreign Missions. There is nothing 
in the constitution of the church which requires such a vow for 
licensure, yet the Presbytery of Baltimore demanded that pledge. Advice 
that it should do this had been given by the stated clerk of the general 
assembly. No other interpretation of this action is possible than that a 
pope had suddenly appeared among Presbyterians who was bent on crushing 
the evangelical cause in the Presbyterian Church in the USA.

The Rev. Henry W. Coray, a graduate of Westminster Seminary and the 
pastor of the Presbyterian Church in West Pittston, Pennsylvania, 
applied several years before for appointment as a missionary under the 
official board of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, but he was denied 
this privilege. He then applied to the Independent Board for 
Presbyterian Foreign Missions and was appointed to go to China. What 
happened? The Presbytery of Lackawanna refused to dissolve the pastoral 
relationship between Mr. Coray and his church because he was being sent 
out by the Independent Board, and declared that if he persisted his name 
would be erased from the roll of presbytery, which is equivalent in this 
case, as far as the Presbyterian Church in the USA is concerned, to 
excommunication. His name was actually erased from the roll of 
presbytery on November 12, 1934. In other words, a Presbyterian minister 
was not to be allowed to preach Christ unless he would become a slave of 
the hierarchy of the church. There were many other cases of high-handed 
methods. The reaction to this kind of propaganda and tactics resulted in 
sympathy for the seminary and an increased resolution on the part of the 
professors and the board of trustees to go straight on in the endeavor 
to teach the truth, no matter what persecution should arise.

A great and unexpected blow fell upon the seminary on January 1, 1937, 
when its leader, the Rev. J. Gresham Machen, D.D., Litt.D., passed away 
while on a missionary trip to North Dakota to present the cause of the 
Bible against modernism in the Presbyterian Church in the USA. He died 
as he had lived, fighting for the faith without compromise.[19]

Prior to this, two of the founders of the seminary had died: in 1930 the 
Rev. Robert Dick Wilson, Ph.D., D.D., LLD., a member of the faculty, and 
in 1934 the Rev. Frank H. Stevenson, D.D., the first president of the 
board of trustees.

After the death of Dr. Machen, the J. Gresham Machen Memorial Fund was 
announced in March, 1937, in order to raise funds for the purchase of a 
campus and buildings, and to secure the necessary $500,000 endowment, 
which sum is usually required by the state of Pennsylvania before an 
institution can grant theological degrees.[20] Up to this time the 
seminary had been housed in rented quarters at 1526 and 1528 Pine 
Street, Philadelphia. As a result of this campaign a beautiful 
twenty-two acre estate, located on the edge of Philadelphia and 
containing five buildings, was purchased in June, 1937, as the seminary 
campus. The main building was dedicated as the J. Gresham Machen 
Memorial Hall at the opening exercises on September 29, 1937.[21]

In 1938 the board of trustees approached the State Council of Education 
asking the council to recommend that the state courts give Westminster 
Seminary degree-granting power even though the half-million dollar 
endowment was not at hand. The state council made a thorough 
investigation of the seminary's academic standards and found them very 
high and fully warranting the power to grant degrees. The council voted 
unanimously to approve Westminster's application to grant the Th.B. 
degree, and the court approved the recommendation and the necessary 
charter amendments. Ordinarily the endowment is necessary but under 
certain circumstances, when an institution is receiving financial 
support equivalent in value to the endowment from members and 
congregations of religious organizations, this may be substituted for 
the endowment. Westminster Seminary satisfied the State Council of 
Education of Pennsylvania that such financial support was being 
received. At the tenth anniversary celebration and commencement 
exercises on May 9, 1939, nearly 100 of the 162 graduates of the past 
ten years who held the regular certificate of the seminary received 
their Th.B. degree. This brought to a successful conclusion the aims of 
the Machen Memorial Fund, and served as a fitting climax to the tenth 
anniversary celebration and a proper memorial to such a great theologian 
and Christian statesman as Dr. Machen.

This recital of the essential facts of the history of Westminster 
Theological Seminary must have impressed the reader with the unique 
character of the institution and with its exceptional resiliency. Few 
institutions have been subjected to such abuse, criticism, and vigorous 
attacks both from within and without. It places in bold relief the utter 
devotion of the seminary to the Bible regardless of persecution, and 
also the enduring qualities of the truth of Christianity under the most 
adverse circumstances.

Controversy in behalf of the truth against the trend of the times in the 
church as well as in the world has sharpened the knowledge of the gospel 
among the followers of the seminary, and has better prepared all those 
associated with the cause to fight the good fight of faith and to preach 
the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. For the past three years the unity 
of purpose among the board of trustees, the faculty, and the students of 
the institution gives promise of a large place of usefulness in the 
future.

The seminary's reputation as an institution which is committed to the 
Westminster Confession of Faith is now firmly established, and its 
scholarly presentation of the truths of the Bible has attracted students 
not only from many states, but from a number of foreign countries as 
well. Its graduates are located in twenty-three states and ten foreign 
lands where they are ministers, professors, and missionaries.

While Westminster's course has been rough and stormy, yet throughout the 
past ten years it has always held to the conviction that the Bible is 
true, that salvation is only by the grace of God apart from the works of 
man, and that the Christian conception of life is the only logical, 
consistent, and reasonable one. The uncertainty, doubt, and anxiety in 
the world today makes such a seminary a ray of hope, for from its halls 
come ministers of the gospel who preach not their own philosophies, but 
speak the authority of the Word of God, "Thus saith the Lord!"
