The Presbyterian Conflict

Edwin H. Rian
Chapter 1. The Beginnings of Unbelief

IN ORDER TO appreciate properly the significance of the theological 
struggle which has just ended within the Presbyterian Church in the USA, 
it is essential at the outset that an historical perspective be gained. 
It is important to realize that this conflict which resulted in the 
formation of the Presbyterian Church of America in June, 1936, now known 
as the Orthodox Presbyterian Church, was not a controversy over some 
trivial matter or a difference between certain individuals but the 
culmination of many years of doctrinal defection. The real basic issue 
was a clash between two divergent points of view in doctrine, one 
conservative or orthodox and the other liberal or modernist. The 
struggle had been in evidence for a generation or more, but it had been 
kept subdued. A study of the history of the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA will show how true this is.

The Presbyterian Church in the USA was organized largely by 
Presbyterians from the British Isles. These Presbyterians of the Puritan 
type settled in New England, New York, New Jersey, Maryland, Delaware, 
Pennsylvania, the Carolinas, and Virginia, where they established 
churches under the guidance and encouragement of Presbyterians in 
England, Scotland, and Ireland. At first they existed as separate 
congregations, but finally in 1706 the Presbytery of Philadelphia was 
formed and later on the Presbyterian Church in the USA was organized 
into synods and a general assembly until it reached its present 
constituency of approximately two million members.

The creed which was adopted by the Synod of Philadelphia in 1729 was the 
Westminster Confession of Faith with the Larger and Shorter Catechisms, 
which documents had been completed by the great divines at the 
Westminster Assembly 1643-49. It is not possible here to discuss all of 
the doctrines of the Westminster Confession of Faith nor is it 
necessary, but one thing is certain—the doctrines of the Confession, as 
admitted by all, are based on the assumption that the Bible is true and 
the sole authority in religion, and that the articles of the Confession 
are a systematic presentation of what the Bible teaches. While the 
Confession necessarily contains dogmas which are distinctive to 
Presbyterianism and taught in the Bible, there also appear doctrines 
such as the virgin birth, the bodily resurrection of Christ, his 
atonement for sin, his miracles, and the full trustworthiness of the 
Bible, which have been regarded as essential by all branches of 
Christendom. It is rather important to keep this fact in mind throughout 
the discussion because the main contention of this survey is that the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA has departed in practice from these 
doctrines.

There are several dates which one might mark as the beginning of 
doctrinal impurity in the church. For example, in 1801 the General 
Association of Connecticut and the General Assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA adopted a plan of union in order to avoid competition. 
By the terms of this plan a Presbyterian minister could serve in a 
Congregational church and vice versa, but the congregation was to 
conduct its discipline according to the form of government obtaining, 
either Presbyterian or Congregational.[1] Some material growth and 
prosperity resulted from this merger, but with it came the inroads of 
Hopkinsianism, which originated in New England and which denied that man 
is depraved and separated from God because of his relationship to Adam. 
Two ministers, the Rev. Albert Barnes, pastor of the First Presbyterian 
Church of Philadelphia, and Dr. Lyman Beecher, professor at Lane 
Theological Seminary in Cincinnati, Ohio, were tried for heresy on this 
point. While Dr. Barnes was acquitted by the General Assembly and Dr. 
Beecher's case was not carried to the General Assembly, it was not due 
to a lack of heresy but mostly because Hopkinsianism was growing in 
strength and could control the General Assembly at times.

The controversy between the Old School and the New School theologies, 
which ended in a division into the Old School assembly and the New 
School assembly in 1837, was the result of doctrinal unsoundness in 
certain presbyteries of the church. When the General Assembly met in 
1837 in Philadelphia, the Old School was in a majority and it decided to 
abrogate the Plan of Union of 1801. A "Testimony and Memorial" was 
addressed to the assembly exhibiting the doctrinal errors and lapses in 
the church. The Old School leaders were determined to rid the church of 
heresy so that a true Presbyterian body would result. While the 
constitutionality of the Plan of Union of 1801 was also attacked, it was 
the doctrinal divergence from the Westminster Confession of Faith which 
motivated the Old School party in seeking the rescinding of the Plan of 
Union. These doctrinal errors consisted mainly in a wrong view of man's 
guilt in Adam, of the atonement, of election, and of regeneration.[2]

After much debate the Synods of Western Reserve, Utica, Geneva, and 
Genesee were exscinded because they were the most affected by the New 
England theology. A strong protest signed by one hundred and three 
ministers, among whom was Horace Bushnell, a leading liberal theologian 
of that day, was entered against the abrogation of the union.[3] This 
action by the Old School party was a bold step, but it was the only real 
solution to the differences in doctrine between the two groups in the 
church.[4] The Old School was truly Presbyterian in doctrine and polity, 
while the New School was tainted with anti-scriptural beliefs.

If the division into Old School and New School had continued, it is very 
likely that the doctrinal controversy which resulted in the formation of 
the Presbyterian Church of America would never have occurred. But the 
Civil War produced new issues which made these two parties forget their 
differences, and a union was effected in 1869.[5] That union should 
never have taken place, for it brought together two parties who 
disagreed fundamentally as to doctrine. It was one of the tragic events 
in Presbyterian history.

There are other events which illustrate the disagreement between the two 
doctrinal factions within the church, but the most important controversy 
was the one which led to a revision of the Westminster Confession of 
Faith in 1903. It is this dispute which shall be examined in detail as 
it demonstrates how much the New School theology had permeated the 
church. In 1788, chapters XX, XXIII, and XXXI of the Confession of Faith 
concerning the powers of synods, councils, and civil magistrates were 
amended and, in 1886-87, the clause forbidding marriage with a deceased 
wife's sister was stricken from chapter XXIV, section 4 of the 
Confession of Faith, but this did not affect the Calvinistic system of 
doctrine of the Confession. The amendments in 1903, on the other hand, 
vitally altered the emphasis of the Confession.

The agitation to revise the Confession of Faith began in 1889 when 
fifteen presbyteries overtured the General Assembly asking that some 
change be made in the doctrinal standards of the church. A committee 
appointed by the assembly brought in a report which was later adopted to 
the effect that the matter be referred to the presbyteries under two 
questions: 1. Do you desire a revision of the Confession of Faith? 2. If 
so, in what respects and to what extent?[6] When the General Assembly 
met in 1890 it was learned that 134 presbyteries had voted in the 
affirmative. This was a sufficient majority to warrant the assembly 
appointing a committee of fifteen ministers and ten elders who were 
instructed to consider the whole matter and to report to the next 
assembly, but they were specifically told that the Calvinistic aspect of 
the Confession must not be impaired.[7]

When the General Assembly convened in 1891 the committee on revision 
proposed changes involving many chapters of the Confession and questions 
in the Larger and Shorter Catechisms.[8] The changes which the assembly 
of 1892 finally sent to the presbyteries for discussion and a vote 
concerned not only the chapters which the committee had recommended for 
revision, but additional ones. These proposed changes failed to receive 
the affirmative vote of a two-thirds majority of the presbyteries and so 
the efforts to revise the Confession failed at that time.[9]

Two reasons in the main caused the defeat of the revisions: the strong 
opposition of the men at Princeton Theological Seminary like Francis L. 
Patton and B. B. Warfield, and the heresy trial of Dr. Charles A. 
Briggs, professor at Union Theological Seminary, New York City. It is 
perhaps true that the heresy trial of Dr. Briggs was the stronger reason 
because it dramatized the doctrinal viewpoint of some who favored 
revision.

Dr. Briggs held to a belief in the errancy of holy Scripture, the 
sanctification of the soul after death, and the sufficiency of human 
reason and the church as adequate guides in the matter of salvation. At 
the General Assembly in 1893 Dr. Briggs was declared guilty and 
suspended from the ministry of the Presbyterian Church in the USA.[10]

After these attempts at revision had failed, comparative quiet obtained 
in the church, but those who believed in a modified Calvinism and a less 
strict interpretation of the Bible continued their fight to revise the 
standards of the church. Many in the church were firm believers in the 
New School theology and were not to be discouraged so easily.

Again in 1900 twenty-three presbyteries overtured the General Assembly 
to establish a new and shorter creed, while fifteen presbyteries asked 
for a revision of the Confession of Faith and a new creed.[11] Such 
demand by so many presbyteries could not be ignored, so a committee of 
fifteen—eight ministers and seven elders—was appointed to study the 
matter and asked to report to the next General Assembly. Through two 
successive assemblies certain changes were considered, and in 1903 
modifications were made by adding a declaratory statement as to chapter 
III and chapter X, section 3; and changes were made in chapters XVI, 
section 7, XXII, section 3, XXV, section 6; and chapter XXXIV on the 
Holy Spirit and chapter XXXV on the Love of God and Missions were added. 
These revisions were less extensive than those proposed in 1890, yet 
they meant a victory for the New School party and a definite toning down 
of the Calvinistic emphasis of the Confession of Faith.[12]

Several doctrines distinctively Calvinistic or Reformed were involved in 
these changes, but the one which is paramount is the doctrine of 
election and its consistent application to the doctrine of the 
atonement. This is seen in the declaratory statement which deals with 
chapter III and chapter X, section 3, of the Confession, and is also 
seen in chapter XXXV on the Love of God and Missions.

In commenting on chapter III the declaratory statement says,

    With reference to chapter III of the Confession of Faith: that 
concerning those who are saved in Christ, the doctrine of God's eternal 
decree is held in harmony with the doctrine of His love to all mankind, 
His gift of His Son to be the propitiation for the sins of the whole 
world, and His readiness to bestow His saving grace on all who seek it.

It is, of course, biblical to say that God loved the world (John 3:16) 
and that Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world (I 
John 2:2). Such expressions must, however, be understood in their 
biblical sense. The declaratory statement gives to such expressions a 
turn that distinctly tends to obscure the particularism of God's 
redemptive love and universalizes the design of Christ's atoning work. 
It is the contention of the Reformed faith that God's redemptive love as 
set forth in the Bible is coextensive with the extent of the atonement, 
and that Christ did not die to save all men but only the elect.

The effort to tone down this particularism of the gospel is also seen in 
chapter XXXV, "Of the Love of God and Missions." Let it be said with 
emphasis that Calvinists are staunch believers in and supporters of 
missions. In fact, they are among the most zealous for preaching the 
gospel to the lost. But in chapter XXXV there is no mention made of the 
fact that God not only loves all in a general benevolent way, but that 
he loves some unto salvation. There is also an omission in this chapter 
of the efficacious grace of the Holy Spirit which makes salvation real 
to some. In other words, that particularism of the gospel which is so 
precious to lovers of the Bible and so offensive to the enemies of the 
cross is studiously avoided. A statement which seeks to declare the 
teaching of the Confession on the love of God and omits the fact that 
God has elected some to salvation is not true to nor consistent with the 
whole of the Confession.

There are those who contend that such an interpretation of the 
Confession of Faith would eliminate the love of God from the Confession 
entirely.[13] It is true that the Confession and the Bible do not 
include the love of God as preached by those who hold to the general 
fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man. It is also true that the 
Confession and the Bible do not warrant the teaching that God loves all 
unto salvation. As Dr. Ned B. Stonehouse pointed out in discussing this 
subject,

    It is not true, however, that the Westminster Confession of Faith 
drops the Biblical doctrine of the love of God. At the heart of the 
Bible, at the heart of Christianity and the gospel, and so at the heart 
of Calvinism, is the doctrine of the particular saving love of God for 
His people. This doctrine of redeeming love avoids the one-sided 
preaching of the love of God, which is so common today, with its 
consequent passing over the righteousness and holiness of God and the 
radical sinfulness of man.[14]

The very same weakness is seen in the declaratory statement concerning 
chapter X, section 3, on elect infants. The declaratory statement is 
right when it says, "With reference to chapter X, section 3, of the 
Confession of Faith, that it is not to be regarded as teaching that any 
who die in infancy are lost." This leaves the question of the extent of 
the salvation of infants dying in infancy open to various opinions. In 
fact, on this point the Scriptures are not definite. But the declaratory 
statement goes farther by saying, "that all lost in infancy are included 
in the election of grace and are regenerated and saved by Christ through 
the Spirit, who works when and where and how He pleases." According to 
the Word of God and the Confession of Faith, no one has a right to make 
such a statement because revealed truth is not clear on the subject. The 
extent of infant salvation has been left a mystery in the Bible and that 
is where it must be left. One of the glories of the Confession of Faith 
is the fact that it includes all that the Scriptures teach but no more; 
it does not speculate. In dealing with this question professor John 
Murray makes it clear that there have been various convictions 
concerning the salvation of infants dying in infancy.

    There have been Reformed theologians of the highest repute who held 
to the position expressed in the Declaratory Statement. Dr. Charles 
Hodge for example [Systematic Theology 1, 26-27] is unambiguous in his 
argument for the salvation of all infants dying in infancy. Other 
Reformed theologians of equal distinction scrupulously refrained from 
taking any such position. It is apparent, therefore, that there is 
surely room for difference of judgment in the matter. Our objection to 
the Declaratory Statement is that it incorporates into the creed of the 
church what is, to say the least, a highly debatable position, and 
therefore a position that should never be made part of creedal 
confession.[15]

A perusal of the discussions concerning these amendments in the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA between 1889 and 1903 will show that the 
Calvinists were on one side of the debate and those with Arminian and 
anti-scriptural tendencies were on the other.

Dr. Grier, editor of The Presbyterian in 1889, wrote with almost 
prophetic insight,

    The General Assembly has by one of its acts just passed opened up 
the sluices of debate in the church for the coming years. It has put its 
Standards in question before the Presbyteries and invited their 
suggestions as to the revision of the Confession of Faith. This is a 
movement which may have immense consequences in the future, and largely 
determine the position of the body in the circle of the Churches, in the 
time to come, and its own stability and unity as well.[16]

In fact, this act of the assembly not only opened up the "sluices of 
debate," but the ultimate revisions in 1903 gave comfort and impetus to 
those who wished the New School theology to control the church. As it 
turned out, the stability and the unity of the church were mightily 
affected, since the child of New School theology, which is known as 
modernism, does dominate that church today, and the unity of the church 
is only in name.

Dr. B. B. Warfield, of Princeton Theological Seminary, entered into the 
discussion against revision with vigor and helped measurably to delay 
action until 1903. In commenting on chapter X which deals with 
"Effectual Calling," he wrote,

    The chapter, as a whole, comes out of the Committees' hands a fair 
model of what a Confessional statement ought not to be—obscure and 
ambiguous where certainty and clearness are not only attainable but had 
already been attained in the original statement, dogmatic where the 
Scriptures are silent or even opposed, and not without both omissions 
and insertions which can be made to play into the hands of error.[17]

Of the report as a whole he wrote,

    Theologically, the report as a whole exhibits a decided tendency to 
lessen the sharpness and precision of the doctrinal statement of 
distinctive Calvinism... To all the clamorous proclamation of false 
doctrine about us—yes in our midst—against which the Church needs 
protection, the Committee has been deaf. To all the demands thus made on 
it for progress in the doctrinal statement of our orthodox truth in 
relation to present-day needs, it has been blind. Turning its back on it 
all, its whole doctrinal work is comprised in requesting the Church to 
lower its voice in telling the world the truth![18]

When Dr. Warfield was asked to serve on the committee for revision in 
1900, he refused on the ground that to revise the standards as was 
indicated would be to lower the testimony of the church to the truth.

Abraham Kuyper, that eminent Dutch theologian, was concerned and wrote a 
long article on the general subject of revision and its perils. He 
pictured the danger in that day of toning down the Calvinistic emphasis 
of the Confession of Faith instead of enriching and unfolding it. He 
concluded his article by stating,

    These are the reasons why the author, hearing of the revision 
proposed in America, and realizing what its consequences might be for 
the Dutch Churches, would feel in duty bound in the sight of God to 
dissuade from such revision in the most positive manner, if it were 
proposed in his own country.[19]

It is significant that Dr. Briggs, who was suspended from the ministry 
of the church for holding beliefs contrary to the Confession of Faith, 
which are known today as modernism, was one of the most vigorous 
proponents of revision. He argued that the people, the elders of the 
church, and the ministers desired relief from the antiquated elements of 
the Confession. He ended his discussion by saying, "Biblical critics 
will not much longer tolerate persecution on the part of a 
contra-Confessional majority."[20]

Dr. Henry Van Dyke, who was chairman of the Committee on Revision, was 
also in favor of the amendments. It is revealing to note that it was he 
who ceased attending the First Presbyterian Church in Princeton, New 
Jersey, in 1924 because he could no longer tolerate the orthodox 
Christianity which Dr. J. Gresham Machen was preaching while stated 
supply of the church.

On the whole it is clear that those who stood for revision wanted more 
than a modified Calvinism; they desired a liberalizing of the 
Confession. Their victory was only partial, but nevertheless it was a 
definite step toward the ultimate goal which they hoped to achieve, that 
of broadening the doctrinal standards of the church.

There may be some who will contend that the revisions of 1903 did not 
modify the Calvinism of the Confession, but the union of the Cumberland 
Presbyterian Church with the Presbyterian Church in the USA in 1906 is 
testimony to the fact that a denomination was convinced that they did. 
The Cumberland Presbyterian Church was a strange mixture of Arminianism 
and Calvinism. Its creed was an attempt to strike a middle ground 
between the two points of view, and, as a result, it was more Arminian 
than Calvinistic. In fact, it was the Calvinism of the Confession which 
was one of the dominant factors in leading certain ministers of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA to separate themselves from the church 
and to form the Cumberland Presbyterian Church in 1810. But when the 
revisions of 1903 were a part of the standards of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, immediately the Cumberland Presbyterian Church began 
to make overtures looking toward union. The Cumberland people felt that 
the Westminster Confession had been modified sufficiently to remove all 
substantial doctrinal differences between these two churches. 
Accordingly, a union was effected between the two bodies in 1906.[21]

The result of this union was to weaken the testimony of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA to the Bible and the Calvinism of the Confession. It 
helped further to entrench the position of those who wanted the 
Confession and the church modernized.

Another attempt to effect a union with other churches which demonstrated 
that the doctrinal defection in the Presbyterian Church in the USA had 
gained a strong foothold was the proposal to unite with other Protestant 
bodies in 1918. In that year thirty-five presbyteries overtured the 
General Assembly meeting in Columbus, Ohio, to consider a proposal to 
merge eighteen Protestant churches into one evangelical church. The plan 
as finally presented by a council composed of representatives from these 
organizations contained stipulations as to government as well as 
doctrine, but it is the doctrinal basis which is most significant.[22]

The preamble to the doctrinal section of the plan reads:

    Whereas: We desire to share, as a common heritage, the faith of the 
Christian Church, which has, from time to time, found expression in 
great historical statements; and whereas: We all share belief in God our 
Father; in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Saviour; in the Holy Spirit, 
our Guide and Comforter; in the Holy Catholic Church, through which 
God's eternal purpose of salvation is to be proclaimed and the Kingdom 
of God is to be realized on earth; in the Scriptures of the Old and New 
Testaments as containing God's revealed will, in the life eternal.[23]

In none of these vague statements is there an attempt to make clear the 
doctrines concerning God, Jesus Christ, the Holy Spirit, the church, 
salvation, the Scriptures, or eternal life. Practically anyone, whether 
orthodox or liberal, could subscribe to such a creed because each could 
read into the statements what he desires. Such a state of indifference 
and doctrinal disintegration becomes all the more significant when it is 
realized that 100 presbyteries of the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
voted for this organic union. It demonstrates graphically how formidable 
had become the number and influence of those who no longer considered 
sound doctrine as essential to the church. Fortunately, the majority of 
the presbyteries voted against the plan of union so that it was defeated 
in 1920.[24]

While this attempt at organic union with many other so-called 
evangelical bodies on a vague doctrinal basis proved unsuccessful, 
nevertheless it demonstrated the temper of a large portion of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA. In fact, to those who could discern the 
trend it showed how rapidly the spirit of compromise and doctrinal 
indifference had spread. To those who were awake to the true situation, 
the next important step in the process of doctrinal defection was no 
surprise but an expected conclusion.

These evidences of unbelief in the church were only the beginning. 
During each succeeding crisis those who advocated modernism added to 
their power and prestige, and when the next bold move of this group was 
launched in the issuance of the "Auburn Affirmation," which will be 
discussed in the next chapter, they not only enlisted a large following 
but succeeded finally in controlling the church.
