Chapter 3. The Reorganization of Princeton Theological Seminary

PRINCETON Theological Seminary prior to 1929 was regarded by theologians 
of all shades of opinion as the citadel of historic Christianity. Such 
great scholars as Charles Hodge, William Henry Green, Francis L. Patton, 
B. B. Warfield, and Geerhardus Vos had made the theology at Princeton 
the standard presentation of orthodoxy in the Christian world. In the 
last years Robert Dick Wilson and J. Gresham Machen were among the best 
known professors, and carried the fame of the institution as a contender 
for the faith to every land where Christianity is taught. It was to this 
seminary that students came to receive instruction for the ministry so 
that they would be able to give "a reason for the hope" that was in 
them, while others entered in order to discover whether orthodoxy had a 
reasonable case and could be accepted as true in the modern world. The 
young men emerged from the institution strengthened in the faith and 
convinced of the truthfulness of the Bible.

Princeton Seminary was known not only as an institution which defended 
historic Christianity, but as one which stood firmly for the propagation 
and defense of the Reformed faith or the Calvinistic system of doctrine 
that is set forth in the Westminster Confession of Faith and is taught 
in the Bible. In 1929, however, a change took place in the 
administration of the seminary and from that time a different and new 
theological emphasis became effective. The administration of the 
institution by a board of directors which controlled the educational 
program, and a board of trustees which held the real property in trust, 
was altered so that a single board of trustees was placed in charge of 
the seminary. With this new arrangement a radical change took place in 
the educational program which has shifted the theological emphasis from 
historic Calvinism to twentieth-century Barthianism. A brief review of 
the conflict which produced the change will reveal this fact.

The Plan for the Theological Seminary of the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA, commonly called Princeton Theological Seminary, was adopted by the 
General Assembly of the church in 1811.[1] It provided for a board of 
directors which had immediate control of the seminary, subject to the 
approval of the assembly. Every board member was asked to subscribe to 
the following pledge:

    Approving the Plan of the Theological Seminary of the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A., I solemnly declare and promise in the presence of 
God and of this Board, that I will faithfully endeavor to carry into 
effect all the articles and provisions of said Plan, and to promote the 
great design of the Seminary.[2]

Each professor was required to agree to the following formula:

    In the presence of God, and of the directors of this Seminary, I do 
solemnly and ex animo adopt, receive, and subscribe to the Confession of 
Faith and Catechisms of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., as the 
confession of my faith, or as a summary and just exhibition of that 
system of doctrine and religious belief, which is contained in Holy 
Scripture, and therein revealed by God to man for his salvation; and I 
do solemnly, ex animo, profess to receive the Form of Government of said 
Church, as agreeable to the inspired oracles. And I do solemnly promise 
and engage not to inculcate, teach, or insinuate anything which shall 
appear to me to contradict or contravene, either directly or impliedly, 
anything taught in the said Confession of Faith or Catechisms, nor to 
oppose any of the fundamental principles of Presbyterian Church 
government, while I remain a professor in this seminary.[3]

In 1870 the General Assembly adopted changes in the plan of the seminary 
which added greatly to the power of the board of directors by allowing 
the board to fill its own vacancies, and to fix the salaries of 
professors, the first of which powers was subject to veto by the General 
Assembly.[4]

The property of the seminary was first held by the trustees of the 
General Assembly, but in 1822 the legislature of New Jersey passed "An 
Act for Incorporating Trustees of the Theological Seminary of the 
Presbyterian Church, at Princeton, in the State of New Jersey," and so 
the trustees of the seminary became the custodians of the property under 
state law.[5]

Accordingly, from that time on two boards were in control of the 
institution: a board of directors which was entrusted with the task of 
directing the educational program, subject to the approval of the 
General Assembly, and a board of trustees which was responsible for the 
real property held in trust by them for the seminary.

The institution had no president until 1902, when the General Assembly 
added an article to the plan of the seminary providing for an election 
of a president by the board of directors, subject to the approval of the 
assembly.[6] The duties of the president are described as follows,

    Such president shall, by virtue of such election, be the president 
of the faculty. He shall be inaugurated in such manner and form as the 
Board of Directors may prescribe, and at his inauguration shall make the 
subscription and declaration required of a professor; he shall be 
subject to the regulations made by the Board of Directors and to the 
prescriptions of the Plan of the Seminary with regard to professors. He 
shall be the representative of the Seminary before the Church; he shall 
be the administrative agent of the Seminary in matters of order and 
discipline, he shall give instruction to the students in such 
departments as the Board of Directors may direct or the General Assembly 
may order. Such president shall, by virtue of his election, as 
aforesaid, become and be a member of the Board of Directors during his 
continuance in office, and a member, ex officio, of all Committees of 
the Board.[7]

Prior to 1902, a chairman of the faculty had been elected by the 
faculty, usually the senior member, whose duties were to preside at the 
faculty meetings, but in no way was the chairman superior to his 
colleagues.[8] The move to create the office of president originated in 
the relationship which Dr. Francis L. Patton had maintained with the 
seminary since 1880. While Dr. Patton had been president of Princeton 
University, he had been a lecturer at the seminary, but in 1902 he 
resigned as president of the university so that there was much agitation 
to make him a full professor at the seminary. The fact that Dr. Patton 
had been president of the university made some feel that a full 
professorship at the seminary was not enough to offer him, and so the 
board of directors decided to inaugurate him the first president of the 
theological seminary. After his installation as president, Dr. Patton 
carried on in this office much in the same way as the former chairmen of 
the faculty had done as unus inter pares, or perhaps as primus inter 
pares. In no way did he assume the full responsibilities or duties of a 
president in the accepted sense of that office. On the other hand, he 
did become a member of the board of trustees and the board of directors, 
in which he exercised great influence mostly because of his strong 
personality and brilliance. In 1913 he retired and the task of choosing 
a successor became a very important and difficult one.[9] After 
considering many candidates and after much discussion, in fact after 
balloting several times, the Rev. J. Ross Stevenson, D.D., LL.D., pastor 
of the Brown Memorial Presbyterian Church in Baltimore, Maryland, was 
elected by the board of directors to the position by a majority of one 
vote. Several on the faculty and board of directors were not at all 
pleased by the election.[10] Dr. Stevenson was inaugurated in 1914, and 
made a member of the board of trustees, and became a member ex officio 
of the board of directors and all of its committees.

Dr. Stevenson, a graduate of McCormick Theological Seminary of Chicago, 
and later a professor there, had served in some of the leading churches 
of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, the most notable of which was the 
Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, New York City. He came to Princeton 
not appreciating fully its theological position and emphasis, and at the 
same time accepting the office of president on the terms set forth in 
the plan of the seminary which he interpreted in the plain sense, but 
which interpretation had never been enforced at the institution.

In fact, his spirit of doctrinal inclusivism and his great zeal for 
church union, even when based upon vague and meaningless theological 
statements, marked his whole career at Princeton and brought an alien 
viewpoint to the institution. It was plain to any objective observer 
that Dr. Stevenson and most of the faculty were far apart in their 
understanding of Princeton's place in the Christian world. The conflict 
between the two viewpoints was a logical result which men like Dr. 
Warfield foresaw and which made them so reluctant to welcome Dr. 
Stevenson's appointment as president.

From the standpoint of administration, Dr. Stevenson conceived of his 
position as that of the real head of the institution who was to have a 
leading part in forming its policies, choosing its professors, inviting 
men to address the students and representing the seminary before the 
church. One who did not know the history of Princeton and its 
administrative policy would be likely to accept that interpretation of 
the president's position from a reading of the plan of the seminary. On 
the other hand, the faculty had always believed that the president was 
little more than a presiding officer who, together with his colleagues, 
decided on the entire educational program for the institution. This had 
been the practice of Dr. Patton as president and of the chairmen of the 
faculty before him.

Doctrinally there was also a divergence of opinion between the president 
and the majority of the members of the faculty. Dr. Stevenson was 
convinced that the institution existed to represent the whole 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, since it was under the direct control of 
the General Assembly.[11] On the other hand, the majority of the faculty 
were fully convinced that the seminary could not possibly represent the 
whole church and be true to its charter and history.[12] Princeton was 
organized to uphold the Westminster Confession of Faith and the Larger 
and Shorter Catechisms, maintained the faculty, and by no standard of 
judgment could anyone say that all the ministers or officers of the 
church held to the truths of these documents in their historic meaning. 
Princeton must represent the Old School tradition in the church, they 
said, if it were to carry out the design of the founders.

Dr. J. Gresham Machen wrote,

    Never has Dr. Stevenson given any clear indication, by the policy 
that he has followed as President of the Seminary, that he recognizes 
the profound line of cleavage that separates the two opposite tendencies 
within the Presbyterian church, and the necessity that if Princeton 
Seminary is to be true to its great heritage and true to the moral 
obligations involved in the distinctive basis upon which it has always 
appealed for support, it must, in this great contention, definitely and 
unequivocally take sides.[13]

Dr. William Park Armstrong, professor of New Testament at Princeton 
Seminary, made the assertion on behalf of the faculty,

    We do not believe that Princeton Seminary can be made a Seminary of 
the whole Church, i.e., representing the whole Church doctrinally, even 
under the constitution of the Church, without departing from its 
historical position because of the prevailing latitude in interpretation 
of our doctrinal standards.[14]...

    The majority of the Faculty maintain that the Institution has been 
historically affiliated with that doctrinal point of view in the Church 
known as the Old School.[15]

On the other hand, Dr. Stevenson maintained,

    We [Princeton Seminary] are the agency of the combined Old School 
and New School and my ambition as President of the Seminary is to have 
it represent the whole Presbyterian Church and not any particular 
faction of it.[16]

So the president and the faculty clashed on the matter of administration 
and doctrinal viewpoint. The president's stand for an inclusive 
doctrinal policy as opposed to the faculty's demand for an exclusive one 
became evident as soon as Dr. Stevenson assumed the presidency.

The first major clash between the president and the faculty came in 1920 
over a Plan of Organic Union of Evangelical Churches, as introduced in 
the General Assembly by Dr. Stevenson, vice-chairman of the Committee on 
Church Cooperation and Union.[17] The plan, and particularly its 
unevangelical preamble, as set forth in chapter one of this book, was 
opposed by professors Allis, Davis, Greene, Hodge, Machen, and Warfield, 
as being contrary to the Westminster Confession of Faith and inimical to 
the life of the church and its witness to the truth of the Bible. On the 
other hand, Dr. Charles R. Erdman, professor of practical theology, was 
a member of the Committee on Church Cooperation and Union which prepared 
the plan and strongly favored its adoption.[18] In other words, Dr. 
Stevenson had the support of at least one member of the faculty in this 
issue, which showed the majority of the professors were opposed 
vigorously to the union on doctrinal grounds. There could be no mistake 
that at least the attitude toward the importance of doctrine and a real 
concern for the integrity and purity of the church's witness to the 
Reformed faith were at the basis of this difference between the 
president and the faculty.

The divergence of opinion on the importance of doctrine and the need for 
defending it arose again during the General Assembly of 1924 when Dr. 
Erdman, a member of the faculty, and Dr. Macartney, a member of the 
board of directors, were candidates for the position of moderator of the 
assembly. As has been seen already in the preceding chapter, Dr. Erdman, 
even though he was personally evangelical, was regarded as the candidate 
of those who wanted a union of all the forces in the church, and on this 
basis the liberals in the assembly supported him. Dr. Macartney, on the 
other hand, was considered the candidate of the conservatives. Dr. 
Stevenson supported Dr. Erdman, while the majority of the faculty were 
staunch allies of Dr. Macartney and his stand for the faith.[19] This 
contributed to the breach between Dr. Stevenson and the faculty.

In the fall of 1924 the conflict between historic Christianity and 
liberalism which had been disturbing the peace of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, became a live issue among the students on the 
Princeton Seminary campus. A delegation of students had been sent to the 
conference of the Middle Atlantic Association of Theological Seminaries 
at Drew Theological Seminary in Madison, New Jersey. On October 21, 
1924, these men gave their report to the Students' Association meeting, 
in which they made it abundantly clear that some of the speakers and 
students at the conference had expressed their doubt about the necessity 
and truthfulness of such doctrines as the final authority of the Bible, 
the deity of Christ, and the virgin birth.[20] After much debate and 
consideration, the Students' Association decided to sever its 
relationship with the Middle Atlantic Association of Theological 
Seminaries and to form an organization of seminaries which would be 
committed to the great truths of the Bible. On April 4, 1925, in the 
city of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, twelve representatives from six 
theological institutions met and formed what is known as the League of 
Evangelical Students.[21] The doctrinal basis was indicated in the 
constitution of the league, in which certain dogmas such as the 
infallibility of the Bible, the Trinity, the virgin birth, the bodily 
resurrection, the substitutionary atonement, and the coming again of 
Jesus Christ were declared essential to the Christian religion.[22] 
Since that time the league has grown to large proportions, having 
chapters in fifty-eight theological seminaries, universities, and Bible 
schools.

The establishment of the League of Evangelical Students brought the 
president of the seminary at Princeton and the majority of the faculty 
into sharp disagreement over its advisability and necessity. The 
president maintained that the league dissociated Princeton from the 
seminaries of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, because most of them 
refused to join the league. In the second place, he declared that the 
league allowed Bible schools to become members and so the firm stand at 
Princeton, "that religion without sound learning must ultimately prove 
injurious to the church," would be undermined. He further stated, "shall 
this institution now be permitted to swing off to the extreme right wing 
so as to become an interdenominational Seminary for Bible 
School-premillennial-secession fundamentalism?"[23]

The majority of the faculty had an entirely different conception of the 
need and influence of the league on the campus of the seminary and in 
the world at large. Their general feeling is perhaps best expressed by 
Dr. Machen when he wrote,

    It [a spiritual advance] has been signally manifested at the 
institution which I have the honor to serve. The morale of our 
theological student body had been becoming rather low: there was a 
marked indifference to the central things of the faith: and religious 
experience was of the most superficial kind. But during the academic 
year, 1924-25 there has been something like an awakening.... 
Controversy, in other words, has resulted in a striking intellectual and 
spiritual advance. Some of us discern in all this the work of the Spirit 
of God. And God grant that his fire be not quenched.[24]

The majority of the faculty, while they did not enter into the affairs 
of the student body directly, nevertheless by their teaching and general 
attitude encouraged the students to continue their testimony among 
seminary and college students. So once again the difference in attitude 
toward doctrine between the president and faculty and the need for 
contending for the faith became clear.

In the spring of 1925 the question of the election of a faculty student 
adviser came before the cabinet of the Students' Association of the 
seminary. The president, W. C. Wright, was personally in favor of asking 
Dr. Erdman to continue in this office which he had held for twenty 
years, although other members of the cabinet preferred some other 
faculty member. Acting on his supposed prerogative in this regard, Mr. 
Wright asked Dr. Erdman to accept the office, which Dr. Erdman did. The 
cabinet called a special meeting, revoked Mr. Wright's appointment, and 
voted to ask the faculty to appoint an adviser from among its members. 
This resulted in the election of Dr. Robert Dick Wilson. The faculty 
felt obliged to make this selection because sympathy with the plans of 
the Students' Association was necessary, and Dr. Erdman had declared 
himself as opposed to the League of Evangelical Students which had been 
recently organized. In all of this controversy over the student adviser, 
Dr. Stevenson was much opposed to the majority of the faculty.[25]

The attitude of the majority of the faculty and of Dr. Stevenson toward 
the report of the commission of fifteen which had been appointed by the 
General Assembly of 1925 to "study the present spiritual condition of 
our Church and the causes making for unrest" differed sharply. Dr. 
Macartney, a member of the board of directors and Dr. Allis, a member of 
the faculty, voiced their serious indictment of the report. Dr. 
Macartney characterized it as a victory won by a "coalition of 
modernists, indifferentists and pacifists,"[26] while Dr. Stevenson 
found in the report a source of much satisfaction.[27]

The differences between Dr. Stevenson and the faculty assumed a personal 
note when Dr. Machen was nominated to the chair of apologetics and 
Christian ethics by the faculty on May 10, 1926.[28] This nomination was 
placed before the General Assembly in May, 1926, for approval, at which 
time Drs. Stevenson and Erdman opposed it vigorously on the ground of 
Dr. Machen's alleged temperamental unfitness for the position. The 
assembly took no action on Dr. Machen's nomination.[29] This attitude 
and action on the part of the president widened the breach still more.

During this heated discussion and debate between Dr. Stevenson and the 
majority of the faculty, Dr. Erdman accused the majority of the faculty, 
and especially Dr. Machen, of labeling him as one who was strengthening 
the "forces of rationalism" when he accepted the pastorate of the First 
Presbyterian Church, Princeton, New Jersey. The basis for Dr. Erdman's 
assertion was an editorial in The Presbyterian, January 15, 1925, which 
commented upon Dr. Henry Van Dyke's return to the First Presbyterian 
Church, Princeton, New Jersey, from which he had departed in 1924 as a 
protest against Dr. Machen's preaching. The Presbyterian stated,

    In a recent notice of the installation of Dr. Erdman, the inquiry 
was raised as to the significance of attempting to unite the rationalism 
of the university, represented by Drs. Van Dyke and Hibben, with the 
evangelicism of the seminary, represented by Dr. Erdman. Does this 
action of Dr. Van Dyke signify that the rationalists have gained an 
important advantage from the combination? If so, the situation and the 
new combination is threatening sacred interests.

To this comment Dr. Erdman replied with considerable agitation,

    Allow me to reply, that I repudiate your insinuations as unfounded, 
unwarranted, unkind and un-Christian.... You intimate that a division 
exists in the seminary faculty. No such division exists on points of 
doctrine. Every member of the faculty is absolutely loyal to the 
standards of our church. The only division I have observed is as to 
spirit, methods or policies. This division would be of no consequence 
were it not for the unkindness, suspicion, bitterness and intolerance of 
those members of the faculty who are also editors of The 
Presbyterian.[30]

Since Dr. Machen was the only member of the faculty who was also an 
editor of The Presbyterian, this rather abusive characterization could 
only refer to him. Dr. Machen immediately explained,

    I do not remember having contributed a line to the paper which has 
not appeared under my own name, and I was quite unacquainted beforehand 
with the reference to my former relation and Dr. Erdman's present 
relation to the First Presbyterian Church of Princeton, to which he 
takes special exception.

    ... With regard to Dr. Erdman's letter, I desire to say two things. 
In the first place, I regret the personal tone in which the letter is 
couched.... But in what do our differences consist? That question brings 
me to the second thing that I desire to say in answer to the letter.

    Dr. Erdman says that no division exists in the faculty of Princeton 
Seminary on "points of doctrine." That assertion I hold to be not 
altogether correct. There is between Dr. Erdman and myself a very 
serious doctrinal difference indeed. It concerns the question not of 
this doctrine or that, but of the importance which is to be attributed 
to doctrine as such.... Dr. Erdman does not indeed reject the doctrinal 
system of our church, but he is perfectly willing on many occasions to 
keep it in the background. I, on the other hand, can never consent to 
keep it in the background.[31]

This personal equation which entered into the debate only aggravated the 
differences between Dr. Stevenson and the faculty still more, and caused 
Dr. Stevenson in May, 1925, to appeal to the board of directors to 
appoint a committee to adjust the problems within the faculty.[32] A 
committee of seven was appointed but no real accomplishment was 
forthcoming, mostly because the underlying disagreement was so profound 
that no discussion could heal the breach; rather, it required a change 
of doctrinal viewpoint which was highly unlikely to take place in either 
party.

This clash between Dr. Stevenson and the faculty, which had caused 
considerable agitation in the church at large, compelled the trustees 
and a minority of the board of directors of the seminary in May, 1926, 
to make a request of the General Assembly through its Standing Committee 
on Theological Seminaries to appoint a special committee to investigate 
matters at Princeton Seminary. On June 2, 1926, the General Assembly 
took the following action,

    That the Assembly appoint a Committee of three ministers and two 
elders to make a sympathetic study of conditions affecting the welfare 
of Princeton Seminary and to cooperate responsively with seminary 
leaders in striving to adjust and harmonize differences and to report to 
the next Assembly.[33]

The committee visited the Princeton campus and had conferences with the 
faculty, the board of directors, the board of trustees, the alumni, and 
the students. In every one of these bodies they found the same division 
as was manifest in the faculty, namely, one party which believed that 
Princeton was founded to teach and to defend, in its purity and 
integrity, the Westminster Confession of Faith as the system of doctrine 
taught in the Bible, and that an aggressive stand should be taken 
against the encroachment of unbelief in the church; and a second party 
which contended with Dr. Stevenson, the president, that the seminary 
should represent the whole church, that the disagreement between him and 
the faculty was administrative, and that certain members of the faculty, 
of whom Dr. Machen was the chief offender, were disturbers of the peace 
of the institution.

The majority of the board of directors, the faculty, and the students 
agreed that the issue was doctrinal and that the attitude toward 
doctrine was important. On the other hand, the president, a majority of 
the trustees, and many alumni felt strongly that if the two boards could 
be merged into one, the difficulties at the institution would be 
eliminated, because in their judgment the real trouble was 
administrative.[34]

The findings of the committee which were given to the following assembly 
can be summarized in this one sentence from their report, "The root and 
source of the serious difficulties at Princeton and the greatest 
obstacle to the removal of these difficulties, seem to be in the plan of 
government by two boards."[35] The committee presented recommendations 
which were adopted by the 1927 General Assembly.[36]

They urged the appointment of a committee of eleven with power to 
recommend amendments to the charter of the seminary in order to 
establish a single board of control. They also asked that the 
appointments of the Rev. O. T. Allis and the Rev. J. Gresham Machen as 
full professors be not confirmed until the reorganization had been 
effected.

The Rev. Samuel G. Craig, D.D., a director of the seminary and a 
representative of the majority on the board of directors, made a very 
able criticism of the report of the committee of five. His main 
contention was that the committee exceeded its instructions and 
authority in making its recommendations.[37] Dr. Craig further accused 
the committee of misrepresenting the faculty and the board of directors 
and of issuing a report which was essentially an ex parte document. He 
also pointed out what the majority of the faculty and of the board of 
directors had frequently maintained namely, that the question of one or 
two boards was beside the point.[38]

At the General Assembly in 1928 the committee of eleven presented 
recommendations calling for a single board of control of thirty-three 
members, certain necessary charter amendments, and enlarged powers for 
the president of the seminary.[39]

The report of the committee of eleven was not unanimous, however, since 
the Rev. Ethelbert D. Warfield, D.D., brought in a minority report of 
one in which he made several criticisms of the majority report, the most 
important of which stated that "the report and its recommendations give 
no ground for hope that they will terminate or allay the discord in the 
Seminary and the Church."[40]

At the same General Assembly a petition containing the signatures of 
over ten thousand ministers and elders of the church representing more 
than thirty synods asked, "We, therefore, the signers of this Petition, 
earnestly pray you to reject the reorganization of the Seminary 
recommended to the General Assembly of 1927 by the Special Committee to 
visit Princeton, and thus to leave the control of this great institution 
where it now resides."[41]

The Rev. W. P. Armstrong, D.D., professor of New Testament at Princeton, 
made a thorough study of the proposed charter amendments, in which he 
demonstrated that some of these were illegal and others unnecessary.[42] 
There will be no attempt here to enter into a study of these amendments 
because that discussion is not essential to the main purpose of this 
book.

The majority and minority reports were ordered placed on the docket of 
the 1929 General Assembly, and the board of directors of Princeton was 
instructed to attempt to compose differences at the seminary and to make 
a report to the next assembly.[43] The board of directors attempted to 
carry out these instructions, but the division in the board became 
apparent when a minority and a majority report was presented to the 1929 
Assembly. The majority report, signed by seventeen, practically agreed 
with the recommendations of the committee of eleven, while the minority 
of ten stated that the main cause of the trouble at Princeton was the 
ambition of president Stevenson, who desired to shift the historic 
doctrinal position of the seminary from the Old School theology to an 
inclusive doctrinal position. "It is here that we find the main cause of 
the serious differences at Princeton Seminary."[44] The minority 
recommended only slight changes in the original plan of the seminary, 
all of which tended to limit the power of the president so that his 
actions would be subject to the advice of the board of directors in 
cooperation with the faculty. The president was also eliminated as a 
member of the board of directors.[45]

In spite of these pleas by the ten thousand ministers and elders and the 
minority on the board of directors, the report of the special committee 
of eleven was adopted by the 1929 Assembly.[46] The report called for 
one board of trustees of thirty-three members, one-third from the old 
board of trustees, one-third from the old board of directors, and 
one-third from the church at large, and the enlargement of the powers of 
the president.

The temporary board of trustees, which was approved as the permanent 
board of trustees by the 1930 General Assembly,[47] made the Rev. W. L. 
McEwan, D.D., chairman. The Rev. Clarence E. Macartney, D.D., declined 
to serve on the board, and the Rev. Robert Dick Wilson, Ph.D., D.D., the 
Rev. J. Gresham Machen, D.D., the Rev. Oswald T. Allis, Ph.D., D.D., and 
the Rev. Cornelius Van Til, Ph.D., refused to continue as members of the 
teaching staff under the new board of trustees. And so, with these 
drastic alterations in management and faculty, the reorganization of 
Princeton Seminary became a reality.

This has been only a rapid survey of the tremendous changes which took 
place at Princeton in 1929, but a description of the many public 
meetings, articles, and debates which occurred, and the bitterness, 
animosities, and heartaches which were created have been purposely 
omitted in order to keep the account as factual as possible.

With the completion of the reorganization of Princeton Seminary the 
question naturally arises: Were the fears of the minority of the board 
of directors, the faculty, the students, and many alumni fulfilled, and 
was the historic doctrinal position of the institution changed from Old 
School theology or biblical Christianity to twentieth-century 
Barthianism and modernism? It is safe to assert without hesitation that 
those fears were fulfilled. A few facts as evidence will prove that 
statement.

Upon this new board of trustees were placed two ministers, the Rev. W. 
Beatty Jennings, D.D., and the Rev. Asa J. Ferry, D.D., who had signed 
the Auburn Affirmation, which, as was pointed out in chapter two, 
declared that the belief in the infallibility of holy Scripture, the 
substitutionary atonement, the virgin birth, the bodily resurrection of 
our Lord, and the miracles of Jesus Christ is non-essential to the 
Christian faith, and that the doctrine of the infallibility of the holy 
Scripture is harmful. The Rev. J. Ross Stevenson, D.D., LL.D., the 
president of the seminary, and the Rev. W. L. McEwan, D.D., chairman of 
the board of trustees, put their stamp of approval upon these signers of 
the Auburn Affirmation on the board, and so upon the attitude which the 
document advocated, in the letter which they jointly signed and 
addressed to the "Alumni, Students and Friends of Princeton Theological 
Seminary" in September, 1929, and in which they claimed that the new 
board of trustees was worthy of the church's confidence and qualified to 
direct the educational policies of the seminary, and that the entire 
faculty was loyal to the Bible.[48] Anyone acquainted with the Princeton 
of the Hodges, Warfield, Greene, and Machen could not conceive of its 
approval of men on the board of directors who held such anti-Reformed 
and modernist ideas.

At the present time only two professors of the regime prior to 1929 
remain: the Rev. F. W. Loetscher, Ph.D., D.D., and the Rev. W. P. 
Armstrong, D.D., as all of the other professors who did not resign in 
1929 are retired or dead. In 1936 Dr. J. Ross Stevenson was retired as 
president and the Rev. John A. Mackay, Ph.D., D.D., was elected to fill 
that office.[49] Dr. Mackay has carried the institution much more to the 
left. The professors who have been asked to serve at Princeton at his 
invitation have, for the most part, been men who hold to Barthianism in 
some form. In fact, Dr. Mackay himself embraces this theology.[50]

Wherein does Barthianism, or the theology of crisis, differ from the 
historic position of Princeton? someone might ask. The difference lies 
chiefly in two matters: first, concerning the authority of the Bible, 
and second, the conception of history. The Barthian school of theology 
does not believe in the infallibility of holy Scripture, while the old 
Princeton was noted for its insistence on this doctrine. As Charles 
Hodge once wrote,

    On this subject the common doctrine of the Church is, and ever has 
been, that inspiration was an influence of the Holy Spirit on the minds 
of certain select men, which rendered them the organs of God for the 
infallible communication of his mind and will. They were in such a sense 
the organs of God, that what they said God said.[51]

Emil Brunner, guest professor of systematic theology at Princeton 
1938-1939, on the other hand, believes that the Bible is the Word of 
God, but only in a very restricted sense. He uses the illustration of 
the phonograph record. The voice of Caruso comes forth from the 
megaphone but there also is heard the scratchings of the needle which 
are comparable to the human errors and mistakes in the Bible.[52]

When the final authority of the Bible is rejected, one is compelled to 
fall back on an authority in religion which is the church or some form 
of human experience. The Barthians do not accept the church as the final 
authority, as do the Roman Catholics, but rather in the last analysis 
must resort to an authority which is to be found in fallible human 
experience. And this they do.

It is the Scripture's testimony to itself as being from God, 
"God-breathed" and the Word of God, which must be the ultimate judge of 
the kind of inspiration. If the testimony of the Bible to itself as the 
Word of God is not to be accepted, how can one trust the authority of 
the Bible for faith and conduct? The belief in the full trustworthiness 
of the Bible is the "impregnable rock" of Christianity and is the only 
consistent and logical position which a Christian can maintain. It is 
the doctrine of historic Christianity. Most assuredly, it was the 
doctrine of the old Princeton.

Such a theology as Barthianism is essentially modernist because upon 
Barth's premises every doctrine and practice must inevitably find its 
authority in the experience of man as the determining factor. At heart 
this theology will destroy the true genius of Protestantism, which looks 
to the revelation of God in the Bible as the final arbiter of faith and 
conduct.

The same tendency to emphasize experience rather than the Bible as the 
norm for Christian life is manifest in Dr. Mackay's endorsement of 
Buchmanism, a movement which includes men and women of all shades of 
thought and belief and which judges the validity of a person's religion 
by the quality of his "changed life" experience.[53] In opposition to 
this point of view the Princeton of old fought, and fought vigorously, 
to show the vagaries of human experience in all of its subtleties and to 
demonstrate that human experience, instead of being a guide in religion, 
must itself be tested and judged by the Bible.

The Barthian conception of history also destroys the very foundation of 
Christianity. Historic Christianity declares that the virgin birth and 
the bodily resurrection of Jesus Christ are events in history, but many 
Barthians claim that these facts are only pointers to the real events 
which take place in "supra-history." Such a contention not only makes 
the narratives in Matthew and Luke concerning the virgin birth and the 
account in I Corinthians 15 describing the bodily resurrection 
meaningless, but the historical foundation of Christianity is utterly 
demolished. It is upon such events in the external world as the birth, 
death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ that Christianity is built. If 
these are not to be regarded as actual historical facts in the plain 
sense, then Christianity as revealed in the Bible loses all meaning. 
When Barthianism is examined closely, it is clear that this attempt to 
place these events in the category of the "supra-historical" is only a 
subtle way of trying to avoid the conflict between the miraculous in 
Christianity and modern scientific ideas. Barthianism's unwillingness to 
accept the historical events of redemption as they are revealed in the 
Bible and as real events in time, sets it in opposition to biblical 
Christianity.

In order to demonstrate further what little regard the new president has 
for the old Princeton, that is, the Princeton prior to 1929, and its 
defense and exposition of historic Christianity, notice should be taken 
of the fact that the Rev. L. R. Farmer, D.D., LL.D., a signer of the 
Auburn Affirmation, was visiting professor of homiletics during the 
academic year 1937-38.[54] This is the first time in the history of the 
institution that any one has been on the faculty who has declared in a 
public document, or in any other way, that the five doctrines mentioned 
in the Affirmation are only theories, and that the belief in an 
infallible Bible weakens the testimony of the five doctrines enumerated.

In another way and in a way more discernible to those not theologically 
trained, the new Princeton has made its position abundantly clear. 
Before 1929, the professors at Princeton were very audible in their 
protest against unbelief not only in the world at large, but also in the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA itself. The men at Princeton assumed the 
leadership in attempting to keep the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
loyal to the Westminster Confession of Faith. Without question the 
seminary was the citadel of orthodoxy. Now the lack of protest against 
the evident modernism among the ministers in that church is almost 
eloquent in its silence. When the amendments to the Confession of Faith 
were proposed at the turn of the century, it was the faculty at 
Princeton, led by Warfield, who protested against them because of their 
tendency to weaken the testimony of the church to the truth. It was the 
Princeton faculty who wrote and spoke against the proposed union with 
the eighteen churches in 1918 on the ground of its unevangelical 
doctrinal basis. In fact, whenever a voice was needed to warn the church 
of unbelief, the men at Princeton were ready to raise their voices in 
behalf of the Bible. Now where are the one-time champions of the faith 
at Princeton? They are not there. Princeton has changed—and changed 
radically.

The modernists themselves have noticed this radical change. Once The 
Christian Century, the leading modernist religious weekly in America, 
ridiculed the antiquated and obscurantist theology at Princeton, while 
now it has taken Dr. Mackay to its bosom[55] and finds space available 
for members of the faculty at Princeton, which formerly was not at their 
disposal save for an occasional article in some series of theological 
debate. The Princeton Seminary of Hodge, Warfield, and Machen is no 
more, and the world knows it.

One of two things has happened since 1929: either the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA has become entirely free from modernism and 
anti-scriptural tendencies so that the Princeton professors have no 
occasion for protest, or else Princeton Seminary has fallen in line with 
the temper of the day and has become more liberal in its theological 
program and attitude. The following chapters will attempt to show that 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA, instead of becoming more loyal to 
the Westminster Confession of Faith, has succumbed more and more to the 
inroads of modernism. The only possible conclusion is that Princeton has 
been definitely liberalized, as shown not only by the writings of the 
professors, but also by the lack of defense of historic Christianity 
within the councils of the church.

The editors of The Boston Evening Transcript wrote,

    One cannot say what will happen at Princeton Theological Seminary, 
but one hopes that the house will stand. Clearly the battle at Princeton 
has a significance reaching far beyond its local scene. Its forces, its 
bitterness, give strong indication that the issues there in contest, as 
in other parts of the United States, are the dominant issues of the 
religious thought of our times. Certainly with regard to the Protestant 
denominations, it now seems clear that upon the outcome of the warfare, 
whether for weal or woe, the future character of Protestant Christianity 
depends.[56]

Princeton Seminary did not stand as it stood before. Its influence is 
now exerted in the direction away from historic Christianity, and that 
defection has profoundly affected not only the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA, but also the complexion of Protestantism in America.
