Chapter 8. The Machen Trial

IMMEDIATELY AFTER the Deliverance of 1934 was issued, there were many in 
the church who did not and could not believe that the presbyteries would 
obey its orders and prosecute members of the Independent Board if they 
refused to resign from the board. The consensus among conservatives in 
the church seemed to be that no presbytery would discipline 
Presbyterians for joining any society whose object was to preach the 
gospel. This opinion went further in the belief that such action would 
only arouse members of the church to greater hostility toward the Board 
of Foreign Missions and the ecclesiastical organization.

In this opinion the conservatives were very wrong, for the 
relentlessness with which the hierarchy of the church began to function 
in enforcing the so-called mandate was not to be mistaken. While some 
presbyteries did nothing at first, the church was soon to witness real 
efficiency in court procedure.

On August 1, 1934, the administrative committee of the general council 
issued a letter defending the deliverance of the assembly, adding the 
information, "that excepting in relatively small areas of our Church, 
the significance of the action of the 1934 General Assembly with 
reference to the 'Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign Missions' 
has been clearly understood and warmly approved."[1]

The Rev. A. L. Latham, D.D., minister of the Third Presbyterian Church, 
Chester, Pennsylvania, wrote an open letter in reply to the 
administrative committee. He said in part,

    I have no connection with the Independent Board, and never have had 
any. Nevertheless, I believe there is abundant ground for the formation 
of the same. The pity is this, that the Church Council and the General 
Assembly have done nothing to remove these grounds ... The Assembly has 
not sought to remove the disturbing cause; but rather, to coerce.[2]

The Rev. Clarence E. Macartney, D.D., issued a challenge to the action 
of the General Assembly relative to the Independent Board under the 
title, "Presbyterians Awake!"[3] He challenged the action on six 
grounds: First, that the General Assembly had no right to initiate such 
action; second, that it violated the right of private judgment; third, 
that it pronounced judgment without a hearing and trial; fourth, that it 
amended the constitution of the church by adding, to the subscription 
vows of candidates for licensure and ordination, a vow to support the 
boards and agencies; fifth, that it compelled every member of the church 
to contribute to the boards; sixth, that it was a usurpation of power 
and inaugurated an era of inquisition and persecution.

The Rev. William B. Pugh, D.D., the reputed author of the Studies of the 
Constitution, answered Dr. Macartney in an article entitled 
"Presbyterians Are Awake!,"[4] condemning Dr. Macartney's charges as 
"emphasized by the incorrect statements, the unsupported assumptions, 
the unwarranted inferences, the serious discrepancies, and the false 
interpretations which are inserted in the article in support of the 
various arguments or pleas for rebellion." Such abusive and intemperate 
language is rather indicative of the lack of judgment and objective 
attitude on the part of the one who wrote the Studies. After this 
tirade, Dr. Pugh attempted to answer each one of Dr. Macartney's points. 
Arguments similar to Dr. Pugh's have already been considered at length 
in the preceding chapter so no further discussion will be presented 
here.

A criticism of the action of the General Assembly also came from the 
Rev. Henry S. Coffin, D.D., president of Union Theological Seminary, New 
York City, a well-known modernist institution. He regarded the founders 
of the Independent Board as bitter, intolerant, unfair, disloyal, and 
bigoted, and the officers of the General Assembly and the Board of 
Foreign Missions as tried and true servants of the church. Nevertheless, 
he did write that the assembly "acted unwisely" and that he read the 
document with "mixed feelings."[5]

These protests by a liberal as well as by conservatives made little 
difference to the church machine. Shortly before the deliverance was 
adopted, a foretaste of what was going to happen occurred in the 
Presbytery of Philadelphia when Dr. Machen transferred his membership 
from New Brunswick Presbytery to Philadelphia Presbytery in January, 
1934.

Dr. Machen had been teaching at Westminster Theological Seminary for 
several years, so he considered it proper that he transfer his 
membership to the Presbytery of Philadelphia within whose bounds he then 
resided and labored. On January 23, 1934, he requested that he be 
granted a letter of dismissal from the Presbytery of New Brunswick to 
the Philadelphia Presbytery. The letter was granted and he was commended 
to the Presbytery of Philadelphia as a minister in good and regular 
standing. On March 5, 1934, the presbytery's Standing Committee on 
Candidates, Credentials, and Unemployed Ministers recommended that he be 
received upon the basis of his certificate of dismissal from New 
Brunswick. Certain members of the presbytery wished to ask Dr. Machen 
questions about his attitude toward the official agencies of the church. 
The moderator ruled that Dr. Machen was not required to answer these 
questions. By a vote of seventy-eight to forty-eight he was received 
into the presbytery and no appeal was taken to the moderator's ruling. 
Following this action, forty-four members of the presbytery filed a 
complaint with the Synod of Pennsylvania against the presbytery's action 
in receiving Dr. Machen. The synod voted to hold the complaint until the 
synod meeting in 1935.

In the meantime the General Assembly issued its decree against the 
members of the Independent Board, and the stated clerk of the General 
Assembly transmitted the action of the assembly to the clerk of New 
Brunswick Presbytery, instead of to the clerk of the Presbytery of 
Philadelphia, and added,

    The Stated Clerk of the General Assembly has on June 13, 1934 
notified as therein provided the following named person who to the best 
of his information and belief is within the jurisdiction of your 
Presbytery, Rev. J. Gresham Machen, D.D., 206 South 13th Street, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

But the Presbytery of New Brunswick had anticipated the stated clerk of 
the General Assembly in its zeal to obey the assembly's orders and on 
June 26, 1934, had passed the following motion,

    By motion, the Stated Clerk was authorized to ascertain from the 
Rev. J. Gresham Machen his answer in respect to the matter sent out by 
the Stated Clerk of the General Assembly, entitled, 'The Independent 
Board for Presbyterian Foreign Missions.'[6]

A little later the Synod of Pennsylvania upheld the complaint and 
declared that Dr. Machen was a member of New Brunswick Presbytery.[7]

An excellent brief on the subject of jurisdiction was written by Dr. 
Machen's counsel, the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths. Its arguments will 
be considered later on in this chapter. On the surface of the situation, 
however, it is evident that the stated clerk of the General Assembly was 
presumptuous and, as Dr. Maitland Alexander, a former moderator of the 
General Assembly, remarked, "If we are to have a Pope give us one with 
the wisdom and conservatism of the Vatican."[8]

As a result of being reinstated in the Presbytery of New Brunswick, more 
or less by fiat, Dr. Machen was held to be subject to its jurisdiction, 
and the judicial process against him for membership on the Independent 
Board was begun by the Presbytery of New Brunswick. Action was started 
by other presbyteries against several members of the Independent Board, 
but since Dr. Machen was the president of the Independent Board, and 
since his trial formed the basis for all of the others, both in form and 
charges, his trial will serve as a basis for detailed study. On the 
other hand, mention might be made of other trials.

The other outstanding trials of Independent Board members were those of 
the Rev. Carl McIntire in West Jersey Presbytery; the Rev. J. Oliver 
Buswell, Jr., D.D., in the Presbytery of Chicago; five members of 
Philadelphia Presbytery: the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths, the Rev. 
Merrill T. MacPherson, the Rev. Edwin H. Rian, the Rev. Charles J. 
Woodbridge, and the Rev. Paul Woolley; the Rev. Harold S. Laird, D.D., 
in New Castle Presbytery; and the Rev. Roy T. Brumbaugh, D.D., in 
Olympia Presbytery. Miss Mary W. Stewart and Mr. Murray Forst Thompson, 
members of the Holland Memorial Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia, 
were tried by the session of that congregation.

Ministers Griffiths, McIntire, MacPherson, Rian, Woodbridge, and Woolley 
were ordered suspended from the ministry.[9] Dr. Buswell was given the 
sentence of admonition.[10] Dr. Laird was rebuked by the presbytery. Mr. 
Thompson and Miss Stewart were admonished. And Dr. Brumbaugh withdrew 
from the church before judgment could be pronounced. It is interesting 
to note that the Presbytery of Chester refused to take disciplinary 
action against the Rev. Wilbur M. Smith, D.D., pastor of the First 
Church, Coatesville, Pennsylvania, for his membership on the Independent 
Board when it adopted a minority report of its Judicial Committee.[11] 
Here was at least one presbytery which had the courage to stand by its 
constitutional rights.

Now for a detailed consideration of Dr. Machen's trial. In answer to the 
presbytery's request for information relative to his membership in the 
Independent Board, Dr. Machen replied on July 25, 1934,

    Without prejudicing the question whether I am or am not still under 
the jurisdiction of New Brunswick or whether, if I am still under the 
jurisdiction of that Presbytery, the Presbytery is warranted in 
addressing to me officially the inquiry contained in your letter, I 
desire to say, very respectfully, for the information of the Presbytery, 
that I have not severed my connection with the Independent Board for 
Presbyterian Foreign Missions; and that I regard the action of the 
General Assembly enjoining me to do so as being contrary to the 
Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.[12]

When Dr. Machen's determination not to resign from the Independent Board 
was learned by the Presbytery of New Brunswick, the following action was 
taken by the presbytery on September, 1934:

    That a special Committee be appointed to confer further with Dr. 
Machen with respect to his relationship with the Independent Board for 
Presbyterian Foreign Missions and to make recommendations to presbytery 
for the disposition of the matter involving the mandate of the General 
Assembly to the presbytery and the relation of Dr. Machen to the 
Independent Board.[13]

A committee of five ministers and two elders was appointed, of which the 
Rev. D. Wilson Hollinger of Trenton, New Jersey, was the chairman. Dr. 
Machen never met with this committee because it refused to allow him the 
privilege of the presence of a stenographer. He wished this privilege 
for himself as well as for the committee if it desired, since every 
member of the committee was opposed to him. In fairness and for the sake 
of accuracy he believed that a written record was essential. After much 
correspondence, the committee finally allowed Dr. Machen to present his 
point of view concerning membership in the Independent Board in written 
form. This statement has already been discussed in detail in the 
preceding chapter.

At a meeting of New Brunswick Presbytery on December 20, 1934, the 
following action was taken on recommendation of the special committee to 
confer with Dr. Machen.

    (1) That Presbytery prefer charges against the Rev. J. Gresham 
Machen, D.D., for offenses which are as follows: With the violation of 
his ordination vows; with his disapproval of the government and 
discipline of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.; with renouncing and 
disobeying the rules and lawful authority of the Church; with advocating 
rebellious defiance against the lawful authority of the Church; with 
refusal to sever his connection with the Independent Board for 
Presbyterian Foreign Missions as directed by the General Assembly; with 
not being zealous and faithful in maintaining the peace of the Church; 
with contempt of and rebellion against his superiors in the Church in 
their lawful counsels, commands and corrections; with breach of his 
lawful promises; and with refusing subjection to his brethren in the 
Lord. (2) That a Prosecuting Committee be appointed by Presbytery, which 
committee shall conduct the prosecution in all its stages in whatever 
judicatory. (3) That the Presbytery transmit the case against Dr. Machen 
for hearing and decision to a special judicial Commission to be duly 
elected by the Presbytery.[14]

Dr. Machen was cited to appear before the Special Judicial Commission on 
February 14, 1935, from which sessions the public was to be barred. The 
first session of the trial was held in the First Presbyterian Church, 
Trenton, New Jersey, in the presence of a large audience composed mostly 
of Dr. Machen's followers and a number of newspaper reporters. The 
protests of the defendant against a secret trial had compelled the 
commission to open the meetings of the trial to the public.

Every member of the commission was challenged by the defendant's counsel 
as to his right to sit on the commission. Dr. Culp was challenged 
because he had signed the Auburn Affirmation. Mr. Magill was challenged 
because he had been a member of the special committee to deal with Dr. 
Machen, and which committee had recommended that Dr. Machen be tried. 
Dr. Kuizenga was challenged because he occupied the chair of apologetics 
at Princeton Seminary, to which chair Dr. Machen had been appointed by 
the board of directors, and because there existed a doctrinal 
controversy between Princeton and Westminster Theological Seminary where 
Dr. Machen served as professor. Mr. Morris was challenged because his 
statements had already prejudiced the case, and because one of his 
elders was a member of the prosecuting committee. Mr. Morris had stated 
that if Dr. Machen could not keep step with the overwhelming majority of 
the General Assembly he should get out of the church. Mr. Hankinson was 
challenged because his pastor, the Rev. A. Kenneth Magner, was a member 
of the prosecuting committee. Mr. Cooley was challenged because his 
pastor was a signer of the Auburn Affirmation. Dr. Kummel was challenged 
on the same ground, and further because he had been illegally elected to 
the commission.[15]

The charges and specifications against Dr. Machen, which were only an 
elaboration of those recommended by the special committee to confer with 
Dr. Machen, were also presented at the first session.[16] At the second 
meeting all the challenges against members of the commission were 
disallowed except those against Mr. Magill, so that six, instead of 
seven, continued to sit on the commission.

The attitude of the commission toward the central issue of the trial, 
that of doctrine, became evident when the defense objected to the 
presence of Dr. Kuizenga of Princeton Seminary on the commission. One of 
the prosecutors immediately arose and said, "We would like to object, 
Mr. Moderator, to the introduction of this, to anything that goes back 
to the Princeton Seminary, or the doctrinal phase of this case."[17]

The question of jurisdiction was the next matter argued. The defense 
maintained that New Brunswick Presbytery had no jurisdiction in the case 
for three reasons: first, Dr. Machen had been dismissed by the 
Presbytery of New Brunswick as a member in good and regular standing and 
received by the Presbytery of Philadelphia, March 5, 1934, on 
recommendation of the standing committee on Candidates, Credentials, and 
Unemployed Ministers by a vote of seventy-eight to forty-eight. That was 
an established fact which no one could refute. Second, the complaint 
which had been filed with the Synod of Pennsylvania by the forty-four 
members of Philadelphia Presbytery could not possibly stay the action of 
the presbytery in receiving Dr. Machen. The Book of Discipline, chapter 
XII, section 8, recognizes a complaint against a "particular 
delinquency, action or decision" of an inferior judicatory, but a "stay" 
or an arresting of the case until the decision is rendered by the next 
superior judicatory can only take place in the matter of a "decision." A 
"decision" involves contemplated action in the future, while in the case 
of Dr. Machen's reception an "action" had been taken which made it a 
fait accompli. Third, the required one-third had never properly signed 
the complaint. The Rev. W. K. Eubank, D.D., who had seconded the motion 
to receive Dr. Machen unanimously, had signed the complaint. There were 
132 present at the meeting, so that with Dr. Eubank's name subtracted 
there lacked one for the required one-third to "stay" the action. What 
is more, the Rev. J. R Jackson had withdrawn his name from the 
complaint, so that actually the complaint did not contain the required 
one-third.

With respect to this question it is worth noting that on April 1, 1935, 
by a vote of sixty-six to thirty-two, the Presbytery of Philadelphia 
adopted a memorial to the Synod of New Jersey stating that Dr. Machen 
was still under the jurisdiction of Philadelphia Presbytery.[18]

As a response to the arguments on jurisdiction, the prosecution set 
forth two grounds for believing that New Brunswick Presbytery did have 
jurisdiction over Dr. Machen. First, Dr. Machen had never presented a 
certificate of membership from Philadelphia Presbytery. Second, the 
stated clerk of the Philadelphia Presbytery had never returned the stub 
of Dr. Machen's certificate to the clerk of New Brunswick Presbytery. 
The defense immediately replied that the lack of receipt of the 
certificate stub by the clerk of New Brunswick Presbytery could not 
possibly change one's membership, and that the Book of Discipline 
recognized no degrees of reception as a member. No attempt was made by 
the prosecution to answer the three arguments of the defense. As was 
anticipated, the commission ruled in favor of the prosecution.

Further objections by the defense relative to prejudgment of the case by 
New Brunswick Presbytery and to the fact that proper charges and 
specifications had never been presented by New Brunswick Presbytery to 
the commission were overruled, thus ending the second session of the 
trial.

On March 7, 1935, at the third session the dramatic and tragic point of 
the trial was reached. In order to appreciate this climax it is 
necessary to note the contrast between the defendant, Dr. Machen, and 
the personnel of the commission.

Without dispute it can be stated that before the commission of New 
Brunswick Presbytery stood one of the greatest theologians of his 
generation. His large and accurate fund of theological knowledge, his 
loyalty to the historic Christian position as held by the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, his keen incisive mind, and his outstanding 
contributions to the defense of Christianity through his books and his 
teaching in the classroom for over twenty-five years, placed him above 
the members of the commission. Dr. Machen by common consent was regarded 
as a great defender of the faith. No one could accuse him of turning 
either to the left or to the right of sound doctrine. Yet, there he 
stood that day on trial for his ecclesiastical life because he had been 
willing to defend the truths of the gospel and accept whatever 
persecution would come to him on that account.

On the other hand, the members of the commission were not only inferior 
to him in theological knowledge, in brilliancy of mind, and in 
contribution to the defense of the faith, but at least one of these, the 
moderator of the commission, the Rev. Cordie J. Culp, Ph.D., had signed 
the Auburn Affirmation which attacked directly the full truthfulness of 
holy Scripture and declared that belief in the virgin birth of Christ, 
his bodily resurrection, his substitutionary atonement, and his miracles 
is nonessential to the Christian faith. Yet it was this very man as 
moderator of the commission who now asked Dr. Machen to stand, and in 
solemn stillness asked him the question, "It is now necessary for the 
court to inquire as to the plea. How does the defendant plead as to 
charge No. 1?" To each of the six charges Dr. Machen replied, "Not 
guilty!"

But the farcical and disgusting aspect of the entire proceedings 
followed immediately. The Book of Discipline states,

    Questions as to order or evidence, arising in the course of a trial, 
shall, after the parties have had an opportunity to be heard, be decided 
by the moderator, subject to an appeal to the judiciary or judicial 
commission, to be determined without debate.[19]

Disregarding this rule and making the trial even more ridiculous, the 
commission issued the following ruling:

    1. This court rules that it cannot accept and hear any further 
arguments or inferences based on the Auburn Affirmation, or on its 
signing by certain members of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.

    2. This court rules that it cannot accept and hear any further 
arguments or inferences against the Board of Foreign Missions of the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. It is not within the province of this 
Commission to hear either defence or attack of the Board of Foreign 
Missions of our Church, since both the General Assembly and the 
Presbytery of New Brunswick, from which this Commission derives its 
powers, have given the Board of Foreign Missions their vote of approval.

    3. This court rules that it cannot accept and hear any further 
arguments or inferences based on the Princeton-Westminster Seminary 
controversy. We cannot entertain any arguments directed against any 
individuals, Boards, Agencies, Institutions, or Judicatories, against 
which no charges have been presented in the Presbytery of New Brunswick, 
and which are not on trial before this judicial Commission.

    4. This court rules that it cannot accept or regard any arguments 
questioning the legality or validity of the Mandate of the General 
Assembly in reference to the "Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign 
Missions." It is one of the well established and fundamental principles 
of the Presbyterian system that a subordinate judicatory cannot sit in 
judgment upon the acts or deliverances of a superior judicatory, whether 
or not we think those acts or deliverances have been wise equitable, and 
for the edification of the Church. So long as such acts and deliverances 
stand this Commission has no power but to obey.[20]

The defense asked for a short recess and then entered a protest.[21]

Another historic church trial comes to mind. Martin Luther, the German 
monk, was asked by the Diet of Worms to retract what he had written 
against the doctrines of the Roman church. He was asked two questions, 
"Do you acknowledge these books to have been written by you?" After the 
books were listed Luther replied, "As to the first, I acknowledge as 
mine the books which have just been named; I cannot deny them." A second 
question was put to him, "Are you prepared to retract these books, and 
their contents; or do you persist in the opinions you have advanced in 
them?" In reply to the second query, Luther asked for time to defend 
himself. "For this reason I entreat your imperial majesty, with all 
humility, to allow me time, that I may answer without offending against 
the Word of God."[22] Luther's request was granted and the next day was 
set as the time for a defense. On the next day he gave his defense and 
ended with the historic words, "And I neither can nor will revoke 
anything, seeing that is not safe or right to act against conscience. 
God help me. Amen."[23]

In other words, even in those dark days when justice was supposed to be 
dead and when alleged heretics were burned at the stake, Martin Luther 
had an opportunity to defend his accusations against the church and to 
show that his doctrines were in accord with the truth of the Word of 
God. But Dr. Machen, in the twentieth century of enlightenment, was 
denied the very basis of justice and fairness and practically condemned 
without a hearing.

As a result of this unexpected and unfair move by the commission, the 
rest of the proceedings became more or less meaningless. The opening 
speech by the prosecution was given by the Rev. D. Wilson Hollinger, in 
which he reiterated that the case was not doctrinal but administrative 
and that the Presbytery of New Brunswick and the church were perfectly 
orthodox.[24] After this the prosecution offered various documents, 
mostly pamphlets issued by the Independent Board, as evidence to prove 
their case against Dr. Machen. The whole procedure was little short of 
ridiculous, especially since the defendant was not allowed to prove that 
his charges against the Board of Foreign Missions were true.

As a formality, the defense moved for a verdict for the defense which 
was overruled by the commission. The defense then expressed the 
willingness to prove that Dr. Machen's charges against the Board of 
Foreign Missions were true.[25] When the court refused to hear this 
evidence, the counsel for the defense stated:

    Mr. Moderator, the rulings of this court relating to argument and 
evidence have deprived this defendant of the right to introduce facts 
and arguments essential to his defense against these charges and to be 
heard concerning the same. Since this defendant is thus precluded from 
offering the defense to which he is entitled by the constitution of the 
Church, the exercise of which right has been denied by this commission, 
he does not find himself able to present a so-called "case" which would 
not include these essential facts and arguments, for such a "case" would 
not be the case which, by the law of the Church, he is entitled to 
present.

    Therefore, Mr. Moderator, under these circumstances the defense has 
nothing further to say.[26]

At the final session of the trial held on March 29, 1935, the commission 
declared Dr. Machen guilty, suspended him from the ministry of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, but recommended that the sentence take 
effect only after appeal to the higher courts had been heard.[27] Dr. 
Machen stated afterwards,

    The Special Judicial Commission of the Presbytery of New Brunswick 
has simply condemned me without giving me a hearing. I am condemned for 
failing to obey a lawful order but when my counsel, the Rev. H. 
McAllister Griffiths, offered to prove that the order that I had 
disobeyed was not lawful but unlawful the court refused to him a word of 
argument. I am condemned for making false assertions about the Modernism 
of the official Board of Foreign Missions, but when my counsel offered 
to prove that those assertions were not false but true, the court would 
not hear a word of the evidence that we were perfectly ready to produce. 
It is not too much to say that a trial conducted in that fashion is 
nothing but a farce. The customary attempt is being made to obscure the 
issue, by representing it as merely administrative and not doctrinal, 
but I think real Christian people and even the general public are being 
less and less deceived by such evasion.[28]

The Rev. Daniel Russell, D.D., moderator of the Presbytery of New York, 
said in an interview published in The New York Times of March 31, 1935,

    Most Presbyterians hold no brief for the Independent Board for 
Presbyterian Foreign Missions. Many regret what has seemed at times an 
intolerant attitude on the part of Dr. Machen toward his brethren.

    Nevertheless, there must be a widespread feeling of sorrow together 
with something of sympathy for the accused in that, after thirty years 
of distinguished service to religion, this famed scholar, whether 
through his own fault or otherwise, has been condemned by his Presbytery 
... and that his denomination, if the condemnation is sustained, can 
find no place in which his brilliant gifts may be utilized....

Was Dr. Machen's trial a fair one? Ecclesiastical lawyers maintain that 
no question of doctrine is involved. In the more adequate view there are 
doctrinal differences which run into the heart of the entire problem. 
These the accused was not permitted to discuss in his defense.

The Rev. A. Z. Conrad, D.D., pastor of the Park Street Congregational 
Church, Boston, Massachusetts, described the trial as follows:

    Not for a generation has anything so high-handed, so unjust, so 
utterly un-Christian been witnessed as the trial of Dr. Gresham Machen 
in the New Brunswick Presbytery... It will be a sorry day for 
Presbyterians if such a travesty as the pretended trial of Dr. Machen is 
permitted to stand as the judgment of the majority.[29]

Dr. Clarence E. Macartney commented,

    Sad, lamentable, tragic, unthinkable that the Church Dr. Machen has 
served for thirty years, and more than twenty of them at our oldest and 
most famous seminary, and to which he has brought renown by his great 
talent, should now repay him by casting him out of its fellowship.[30]

Thus ended the trial of the Rev. J. Gresham Machen, D.D., Litt.D., 
before the Special Judicial Commission of the Presbytery of New 
Brunswick. Dr. Machen appealed the decision to the Permanent Judicial 
Commission of the General Assembly, but he lost the appeal and was 
suspended from the ministry of the church.[31] The years that have 
intervened only make the decision all the more unfair and sad. This 
travesty of justice remains as a blot on the history of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, and as an illustration that history repeats itself. 
The church is once more in a state of apostasy and spiritual decay, for 
how else could it "excommunicate" one of its greatest and most valiant 
soldiers of the truth?

In 1893 the church suspended Dr. Charles A. Briggs of New York from the 
ministry because he did not believe in the infallibility of the Bible, 
and in 1936 the same church suspended Dr. Machen from the ministry 
because he was determined to follow the teachings of the infallible Word 
of God. Do not these two actions indicate the tremendous transformation 
in the Presbyterian church from orthodoxy to modernism?
