Chapter 13. Church Property Rights

AS SOON AS the Orthodox Presbyterian Church was formed, ministers and 
congregations of the Presbyterian Church in the USA began renouncing the 
jurisdiction of the church and uniting with the new body. This involved 
the question of the ownership of church property. Did it belong to the 
denomination as a whole or to the individual congregations which built 
it and paid for it?

A Special Committee on Legal Procedure was appointed by the 1936 General 
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA,

    to take such measures as may be adequate to maintain the full 
constitutional authority of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., guard 
all its interests and protect all its property rights, and associate 
with them, in the above responsibilities, such ministers and ruling 
elders, not exceeding seven in number, as they may deem wise counselors, 
and to make full report to the next General Assembly.[1]

Two of the six ministerial members of this committee, the Rev. George E. 
Barnes, D.D., and the Rev. Robert B. Whyte, D.D., were signers of the 
Auburn Affirmation.[2]

In practically every instance, with the exception of two congregations, 
one in North Dakota and the other in Wilmington, Delaware, those 
congregations which voted to withdraw from the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA were divided in their allegiance. In most cases only a few 
desired to remain in the Presbyterian Church in the USA, but these 
individuals, apparently, expressed no desire to prevent the vast 
majority of the congregation from using the building as a place of 
worship under their new relationship with another denomination. Yet in 
every case, whether the minority desired it or not, and even where the 
congregation voted unanimously to leave the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA, the Committee on Legal Procedure of that church entered a suit in 
the civil courts to restrain the congregation from using the property as 
a place of worship under any other denomination than the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA. Suits involving property valued at more than two 
million dollars were begun in the civil courts in the Synods of New 
England, New Jersey, Baltimore, Pennsylvania, Iowa, North Dakota, South 
Dakota, and Wisconsin.[3]

This committee used as its guide the principles of Presbyterian church 
property laid down by the Supreme Court of the United States in the case 
of Barkley vs. Hayes, which states that a local congregation is an 
integral part of the church as a whole, and as such its property is 
owned ultimately by the denomination.[4]

The most outstanding case involving church property was that of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA vs. The Presbyterian Church of 
Collingswood, New Jersey, of which the Rev. Carl McIntire was pastor. 
Mr. McIntire, a member of the Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign 
Missions, had been suspended from the ministry of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA and had subsequently renounced the jurisdiction of 
that church and had united with the Presbyterian Church of America. The 
congregation then voted on June 15, 1936, to withdraw from the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA and to remain independent 
ecclesiastically, but continued to use the church building and Sunday 
School rooms, valued at some $200,000.[5] On June 26, 1936, the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, through five members of the Collingswood 
Presbyterian Church who were opposed to Mr. McIntire, applied for an 
injunction to restrain the congregation from the use of the buildings. 
The congregation filed an answer within ten days, and as a result the 
Rev. Carl McIntire and congregation were allowed to worship in the 
church until the case had been heard and a decision had been rendered.

On March 3, 1937, the case of J. Earnest Kelly versus Carl McIntire, et 
al., was heard before vice chancellor Francis B. Davis in Camden, New 
Jersey. The plaintiffs in the case argued that an individual 
Presbyterian church is an integral part of the whole denomination so 
that its property belongs to the denomination and cannot be used for any 
purpose not sanctioned by the judicatories of the church. Mr. McIntire 
had been suspended from the ministry of the church and, being under this 
censure, he had no right to preach in the church until his censures had 
been removed and his right to minister fully restored. The congregation 
had withdrawn from the denomination and so should not be allowed to use 
the building for worship but must seek other premises for such purposes.

The defendants, on the other hand, maintained

    that the agencies and judicatories of the Presbyterian Church in the 
U.S.A. have so departed from the fundamental principles, faith and 
constitution of the denomination, that these denominational agencies and 
those avowing loyalty to them, are not entitled to the property of the 
Collingswood Presbyterian Church as against the members thereof who have 
steadfastly remained loyal to the principles as set forth in the 
Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. under which title 
was acquired and under which the congregation of the local church was 
formed.[6]

With reference to the Rev. Carl McIntire, the defendants claimed,

    The express violation of the Constitution of the Presbyterian Church 
in the trial and suspension of defendant, Carl McIntire, is evident in 
four particulars; first, the mandate forming the basis of the charges 
against him was an improper basis for the procedure; second, the 
presbytery failed to stay the proceedings after a complaint was filed 
with the Synod; third, there was a variance in the charges and 
specifications which were presented and those upon which the actual 
trial was held; and fourth, the synod violated the constitution in 
affirming the judgment of the lower court although many specifications 
of error were sustained.[7]

These matters mentioned above were express violations of the 
constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, and the censures 
placed upon the Rev. Carl McIntire had no legal effect. In view of this 
situation, the defendants said no other action was possible than for Mr. 
McIntire to renounce the jurisdiction of the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA and for the congregation to do likewise. The congregation had not 
seceded from the denomination but had simply announced that it could not 
"accept the jurisdiction of a body which openly and avowedly defies this 
Constitution."[8]

The judge ruled in favor of the Presbyterian Church in the USA on the 
principle that a local congregation is subject to the church as a whole, 
and cannot use the property contrary to the wishes of the 
denomination.[9] The judge refused to rule on the doctrinal controversy 
as immaterial to the case. Therefore the congregation was restrained 
from using the property and Mr. McIntire from preaching and conducting 
services in the building "until his censures are removed and his right 
to minister has been restored by due proceedings according to the 
constitution and practices of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A."[10] 
Mr. McIntire and the congregation which left with him did not appeal the 
decision to a higher court but left the building to worship in a newly 
constructed tabernacle.[11]

The principles by which the Special Committee on Legal Procedure of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA was guided in this case, and which were 
upheld by the civil courts in most of the property cases, were as 
follows:

    1. An individual Presbyterian Church is an integral part of the 
whole Presbyterian denomination, and is subject to the Constitution of 
the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. Its entire property belongs to the 
denomination itself, and cannot be used for any purposes which are not 
sanctioned by the judicatories of the Church.

    2. The members of an individual Presbyterian Church cannot by solemn 
resolution repudiate the authority of the Presbyterian Church in the 
United States of America, then by subsequent resolution attempt to take 
their church property out of the denomination, even if their effort in 
so doing is unanimous.

    3. In the event of secession, the property remains for the use of 
the loyal members of the congregation recognized by the judicatories of 
the Presbyterian Church in the United States of America.

    4. The orders and decisions of the judicatories of the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A. are final and binding upon its members and every 
part of the Church, and must be accepted in litigation before the civil 
courts as conclusive.

    5. Civil courts consider themselves incompetent judges in matters of 
faith, doctrine, and ecclesiastical law, and consequently will not 
inquire into such matters, particularly when the religious denomination 
has its own system of courts to determine cases of that character.[12]

Every case to date involving church property between the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA and those who renounced its jurisdiction since 1936, 
has been awarded to the Presbyterian Church in the USA upon these 
principles, with the exception of one case.

The First Presbyterian Church in Leith, North Dakota, voted unanimously 
on August 2, 1936, to renounce the judicatories of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA. The Rev. Samuel J. Allen, the pastor, had already 
done so and had become affiliated with the then Presbyterian Church of 
America, later known as the Orthodox Presbyterian Church. Immediately, 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA, through its Presbytery of Bismarck, 
brought suit in the civil courts against the officers and members of the 
First Presbyterian Church of Leith, attempting to secure possession of 
and title to the church property. The same arguments in substance were 
presented by both parties in this case as in the case involving the 
Collingswood Presbyterian Church. However, the First Presbyterian Church 
of Leith had voted unanimously to renounce the jurisdiction of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA. On June 17, 1939, the courts handed down 
a decision in favor of the defendant church. In the mind of the court 
the case hinged upon the unanimous vote of the congregation.

    It seems clear that a minority, or even one member of a 
congregation, may prevent the use of the church property for purposes 
other than the trust for which it was created....

    If there isn't even one to object, then can the general organization 
of the denomination (plaintiff in this case) which is no part of the 
Congregation, prevent the unanimous congregation from using the property 
as it sees fit?

    The Church at Leith, North Dakota, is a North Dakota corporation 
under the control of trustees. The cestuis que trust are the members of 
the Congregation. The Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. is in no way a 
party to this trusteeship....

    If the trustees act within the scope of their authority which they 
received from the Congregation with respect to the property, it seems 
the plaintiff in this case would be interfering with the powers and 
duties of the trustees in attempting to take the property away from 
them....

    ... The Trustees represent the Congregation, and the trustees may do 
with the property whatever the cestuis que trust unanimously consent to 
their doing.

    There was no schism. There was no disagreement whatever in the 
congregation, or with the trustees, and the court can find no operation 
of the law, or under the Constitution of the plaintiff which makes it 
the equitable owner of the property.[13]

The court in this case directly contradicted the principle laid down by 
the Special Committee on Legal Procedure of the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA, that "the members of the individual Presbyterian Churches 
cannot by solemn resolution repudiate the authority of the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A., then by subsequent resolution attempt to take 
their church property out of the denomination, even if their effort in 
so doing is unanimous."

A similar case is now pending before the courts of Delaware, that of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA versus the members and officers of the 
Eastlake Presbyterian Church of Wilmington, Delaware, which voted 
unanimously on June 24, 1936, to renounce the jurisdiction of that 
denomination.

Another case involving church property is now before the courts in 
Portland, Maine, but this suit is somewhat different. The Second Parish 
Presbyterian Church in Portland and its pastor, the Rev. John H. 
Skilton, voted on June 30, 1936, to withdraw from the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA and to unite with the then Presbyterian Church of 
America. The Presbyterian Church in the USA applied for an injunction 
asking the court to restrain the congregation from using the property 
for worship. This the court refused to grant. The case proper is now 
being heard before the civil courts.

The Second Parish Presbyterian Church building is owned by a corporation 
known as the Second Parish in the Town of Portland, which leases the 
property rent free to the Second Parish Presbyterian Church. Members and 
contributors to the church can become members of the Second Parish in 
the Town of Portland only by election which is conducted by the 
corporation as an organization separate from the church. This means that 
the church building is held by the corporation entirely separate from 
the congregation. Since this difference in ownership obtains, the 
decision of the court is awaited with much interest.

Certain individuals of the Presbyterian Church in the USA look upon this 
legal action against members who have left the denomination as "highly 
discreditable to the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.,"[14] because in 
most instances the church buildings were purchased by the local 
congregations without financial aid from the denomination as a whole. 
The entire proceedings have not advanced the cause of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA in the estimation of the public. As was pointed out in 
chapter twelve, the Orthodox Presbyterian Church has made such legal 
action impossible and thereby has avoided a potentially great wrong.

In practically every case the withdrawing congregations have built new 
edifices and their work has gone on unabated. The technical legalities 
have compelled the courts to yield to the demands of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, while the underlying doctrinal differences have been 
brushed aside. Yet the decisions in favor of the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA have in no way destroyed the basic conflict of theology which 
really caused hundreds of members to leave that communion.

The ministers and the members of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church have 
demonstrated their allegiance to the Bible rather than to bricks and 
mortar, and have tried to live out the words of Martin Luther's hymn,

    Let goods and kindred go,
    This mortal life also;
    The body they may kill;
    God's truth abideth still,
    His Kingdom is forever.


