Chapter 10. Philadelphia and Chester Presbyteries

THE PRESBYTERIES of Philadelphia and Chester were particularly obnoxious 
to those in control of the Presbyterian Church in the USA because in 
these two bodies the modernists, the doctrinal indifferentists, and the 
supporters of the ecclesiastical organization were in a decided 
minority. For many years these two presbyteries could be counted upon to 
oppose any move in the church at large which would tend to weaken its 
testimony to the full truthfulness of the Bible and to compromise the 
church's attitude toward unbelief.

The minority report which the General Assembly of 1923 adopted, and 
which declared that five central verities of Christianity are essential 
doctrines of the Word of God, was made by the Rev. A. Gordon McLennan, 
D.D., then pastor of the Bethany Presbyterian Church, Philadelphia. It 
was in Philadelphia that Westminster Theological Seminary had been 
launched to carry on the scholarly and Presbyterian traditions of 
Princeton Theological Seminary before its reorganization in 1929 so as 
to be complacent toward modernism. It was by Philadelphia Presbytery 
that the overture asking for drastic reform within the Board of Foreign 
Missions had been adopted in 1933. In a very consistent fashion the 
conservatives in this presbytery had elected their men as moderators and 
as members of the various important committees. All of these actions 
were accomplished according to the rules of the presbytery and the 
constitution of the church, simply because the Bible-believers vastly 
outnumbered the modernists. This fact irked the Auburn Affirmationist 
members of the presbytery, of whom there were eleven, and when they 
discovered that their case was hopeless in the presbytery, they decided 
to appeal to the general assembly which was overwhelmingly sympathetic 
with their point of view.

The Presbytery of Chester had taken less spectacular actions and had not 
been the storm center of the church in the controversy between 
Bible-believers and modernists; nevertheless, the men in the presbytery 
had stood firmly for historic Christianity. It had dared to challenge 
the orthodoxy of the Board of Foreign Missions by its criticism of it. 
It had licensed Blackstone and Kauffroth after the 1934 "mandate," even 
though both of the young men refused to pledge blind allegiance to the 
boards and agencies of the church, which licensures were upheld by the 
1935 General Assembly. It also had refused to bring the Rev. Wilbur M. 
Smith, D.D., a member of the Independent Board, to trial for his failure 
to obey the "mandate." In these and other ways the majority in the 
presbytery revealed their steadfast determination to be faithful to the 
Bible and the Westminster Confession of Faith despite the general 
assembly and the ecclesiastical overlords.

The minority in the Presbytery of Chester was made up mostly of 
followers of the Rev. W. B. Pugh, D.D., an assistant in the office of 
the stated clerk of the general assembly and the heir-apparent to that 
position. In fact, he was elected to that office by the 1938 General 
Assembly. During the struggle within the church between the two forces, 
Dr. Pugh did everything in his power to thwart the actions of the 
conservatives. But in spite of his ingenuity and persistence, he, like 
the minority in Philadelphia Presbytery, was unable to sway the 
presbytery to his viewpoint. Consequently, he and his satellites also 
petitioned the general assembly for aid.

The memorial to the general assembly from the minority in the Presbytery 
of Philadelphia, signed by fifteen ministers and ninety-eight elders, 
listed their grievances under two headings, (1) direct violations of the 
constitution, and (2) violations of the general rules for judicatories. 
Under the first caption the licensure of several candidates for the 
ministry was criticized on the ground the presbytery refused to compel 
the candidates to be subjected to questions concerning their loyalty to 
the boards and agencies of the church. The presbytery did this on the 
ground that such questions were extra-constitutional. As has been 
already stated, the Permanent Judicial Commission of the general 
assembly, approved by the general assembly, upheld the Presbytery of 
Chester on this point.

They also objected to the presbytery's delay in bringing to trial the 
members of the Independent Board. The other so-called violations under 
the second heading were largely due to the fact that the majority voted 
for its men as committee members and officers, leaving the minority 
without the representation which it desired, a situation which happens 
in a deliberative body where the majority rules. The other objections 
were mostly trivial, such as an inaccurate roll call, unseemly 
interruptions, and visitors mingling with members of presbytery. 
Grievances if a similar nature were also filed by the minority in 
Chester Presbytery.[1]

A commission of nine was appointed by the general assembly with 
instructions to dissolve the differences in the presbyteries.[2] In 
October and November, 1935, this committee held executive meetings in 
Philadelphia with groups and individuals representing various shades of 
opinion in both Philadelphia and Chester Presbyteries. The public and 
the press were barred from these investigations. Because each one was 
pledged to secrecy, most of the conservative leaders of Philadelphia 
refused to appear, so that a printed statement was issued on their 
behalf by the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths, in which the conflict 
between modernism and Christianity in the world and in the Presbytery of 
Philadelphia was enunciated, and a strong plea for the elimination of 
modernism was entered.[3]

After hearing members of both presbyteries and after deciding on a plan 
of action, the commission submitted a program of twelve points to each 
presbytery, which was adopted with only the militant members of each 
presbytery dissenting. It urged the members of the presbyteries to love 
one another, to respect minorities, to create a general council, to 
establish a Vacancy and Supply Committee, to adopt a rule of retirement 
of ministers at age seventy, and to establish a metropolitan presbytery 
composed of several surrounding presbyteries.[4]

In this twelve-point program no mention whatsoever is made of the 
profound doctrinal differences which existed in the two presbyteries and 
which were the real cause of the trouble. This is studiously avoided and 
instead the groundwork is laid for streamlining the organization of the 
presbyteries so that it would be in harmony with the trend of the whole 
church. Strong committees on vacancy and supply were recommended, which 
committees could control the supplying of vacant pulpits with men who 
would fit in with the doctrine of those on the committees. The Auburn 
Affirmationist members of Philadelphia Presbytery got exactly what they 
wanted, because when the Independent Board members left the presbytery, 
the modernists and those conservatives whom they had cowed into 
submission actually held the majority. In fact, shortly before the 
Independent Board members resigned from the presbytery, that situation 
obtained.

Two particular recommendations of the committee calling for 
constitutional changes were aimed at those associated with Westminster 
Theological Seminary and the Independent Board, and the graduates of 
Westminster Seminary, because they had been called "centers of 
dissension" and "disturbers of the peace." The committee urged that only 
pastors and elders be allowed to vote and that candidates for the 
ministry from seminaries not under the control of the general assembly 
be referred to the synod's Committee on Licensure and Ordination.[5]

An overture which would accomplish this and tend to eliminate graduates 
of Westminster Theological Seminary and other institutions not under the 
jurisdiction of the general assembly from the ministry of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA was presented to the 1937 General 
Assembly, but the Standing Committee on Polity's recommendation of no 
action was adopted.[6]

The commission of nine also recommended that a large metropolitan 
presbytery be formed in Philadelphia, which would eventually include 
Philadelphia Presbytery and portions of Philadelphia North and Chester 
Presbyteries. In 1937, the commission recommended that this matter be 
referred to the Synod of Pennsylvania for further study. Up to this 
writing no changes have been made in the boundaries of those 
presbyteries.

The commission reported to the 1937 General Assembly that the 
Presbyteries of Philadelphia and Chester were reorganizing along the 
lines suggested. Having concluded their work, the commission said that 
it, "Having now helped these Presbyteries to set their feet upon the 
paths of peace, and confident that the good work which has begun in them 
will be perfected by the Holy Spirit, respectfully asks to be 
discharged."[7]

The prediction of the conservative leaders that the complexion of these 
presbyteries would be changed by the recommendations of the commission, 
from one of militant defense of the faith and loyalty to the Confession 
of Faith to one of docility toward the leaders of the church and 
compromise with modernism, was evident immediately. The Rev. George E. 
Barnes, a signer of the Auburn Affirmation, was elected moderator of 
Philadelphia Presbytery for two successive terms, a procedure almost 
without precedent, and this honor was bestowed upon one who had flouted 
the doctrines of the church. When the founders of the Orthodox 
Presbyterian Church left the Presbyterian Church in the USA, the Auburn 
Affirmationists and their friends were in the saddle in the Presbytery 
of Philadelphia.

The Presbytery of Chester was also reorganized and from then on 
controlled by the Rev. W. B. Pugh, D.D., and his followers according to 
the dictates of the leaders of the church. The voice of protest against 
modernism and modernists in the church, which had been so loud and clear 
in these two presbyteries, became strangely silent. Philadelphia and 
Chester Presbyteries, which had been the real bulwarks of the faith, 
which had carried the brunt of the battle to keep the church true to its 
Confession of Faith and the Bible, and which had attempted to warn the 
church of the encroachments of modernism, were now mere instruments in 
the hands of the rulers of the church. The demise of a noble testimony 
had taken place, and the church was deprived of the witness of two 
presbyteries where some real constructive action in favor of the Bible 
might have been taken.
