Chapter 15. Whither Protestantism?

THE ASSERTION was made in the preface of this book that the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA and many Protestant churches of America in their 
corporate testimony have turned away from historic Christianity and are 
witnessing to another gospel known as modernism. The foregoing chapters 
have attempted to prove that judgment with respect to the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA. It is not within the province of this volume to 
present evidence in substantiation of the indictment concerning 
modernism in the other Protestant churches. On the other hand, how 
anyone who has the slightest knowledge of Christianity and its theology 
can listen to the sermons over the radio which are sponsored by the 
Federal Council of the Churches of Christ in America, read the 
contributions of ministers and theological professors of those churches 
in the denominational magazines, examine even superficially the 
literature which is being distributed by the boards and agencies, and 
listen to the teaching in the denominational colleges and theological 
seminaries and still believe that these churches are proclaiming the 
Christianity of the Bible and that gospel which was revived by the 
Protestant Reformation, is beyond comprehension. Modernism has won a 
sweeping victory, said Dr. Harry Emerson Fosdick, and he has never made 
a truer statement. The individual ministers in these churches who still 
believe and preach the true gospel of Jesus Christ as understood by all 
branches of Christendom for nineteen centuries are growing fewer each 
year. And with the theological seminaries by and large committed to 
modernism, this process will continue until such ministers are very few.

There are notable exceptions, however, among the large denominations. 
One of these is the Lutheran Church (Missouri Synod), which has a 
constituency of nearly one million and one of the largest Protestant 
theological seminaries, Concordia Theological Seminary, located in St. 
Louis. In the last few years one of its professors, the Rev. Walter A. 
Maier, Ph.D., has been preaching sermons over the radio which have 
warmed the hearts of those who love the gospel. It almost makes one 
believe that the spirit of Martin Luther has come to life again. A 
number of the smaller church bodies, like the Christian Reformed Church, 
are also faithful to the gospel of the Bible. But, on the whole, the 
voice which Protestantism is raising in America today is not the voice 
of Christianity, which is a condemnation of sin and a message of 
judgment to come, of salvation through the sacrificial atonement of 
Christ as a substitute for sinners, but the voice of modernism, which 
recognizes a divine spark in each man that only needs to be fanned into 
a flame and which calls on man to work out his own salvation.

Some one might ask, "What is modernism and how does it differ from 
Christianity?" At the outset it must be stated that the label, 
modernism, is question-begging and a misnomer. The religion which is 
called modernism is not new or up-to-date, as its name implies. It does 
not advance any twentieth-century discovery of religion which makes all 
other conceptions of Christianity passé. In fact, it is not a version 
nor even a perversion of Christianity, but a different religion. There 
are many kinds and degrees of modernism, but they have a common 
foundation. At the root is the denial of the supernaturalism of 
Christianity, a denial that God can and does intervene in his creation. 
In other words, its basis is naturalism.

Anyone acquainted with church history and Christian theology knows that 
such a manifestation of religion as modernism is not modern or new. 
While Jesus Christ was still upon this earth there were those who denied 
his miraculous powers and the resurrection from the dead. At one period 
in the fourth century Athanasius stood almost alone in his steadfastness 
to the Christianity of the Bible. Spinoza of the seventeenth century 
denied the miraculous elements of Christianity because, he said, 
miracles were impossible and contrary to a proper idea of God. Then came 
the scientists of the nineteenth century who asserted that, according to 
their observations and experiments in hundreds and thousands of cases, 
God did not interpose in nature by supernatural power. Therefore he has 
never done so. In the field of biblical studies, but leading in the same 
direction, the theologians of Germany such as Schleiermacher, Ritschl, 
Baur, and others asserted that, according to their findings, the 
historical accuracy of the books of the Bible is not to be trusted. It 
is difficult to know what Christ said or did, they contended, because 
the writers of the Gospels contradict themselves, thereby proving that 
the Bible is not a God-inspired document. In other words, unbelief has 
had many tides and has taken many forms, such as pantheism, deism, 
liberalism, and modernism, but they all resolve themselves into the same 
thing—naturalism.

Modernism, or unbelief, has entered the Protestant church in America in 
a very subtle way. The theological professors in America began to accept 
these modern "higher critical" views of the Bible and the naturalism of 
unbelieving science and to teach these ideas to the ministerial students 
in the seminaries. In turn, many ministers assimilated these views, 
preached them from the pulpits, and convinced the laymen, who were not 
learned in the knowledge of the Bible and Christianity, that modernism 
is the religion for this day. The colleges and universities aided in 
this process because they have accepted the dicta of modern science, 
which state that the world as it now exists is the result of natural 
processes. So today, America, and for that matter most of the western 
world, is experiencing almost complete spiritual bankruptcy. At a time 
when the strong, authoritative message of the Christian church is needed 
to call the nations and men back to the God of the Bible, there is no 
such clarion call, but instead some feeble sputterings of confidence in 
the inherent goodness of man and the hope that somehow or other he will 
muddle through. Modernism has won a sweeping victory in the Christian 
church, no doubt, but it has also left the church feeble and spiritually 
decadent.

Laymen have begun to recognize this impotency of the church in the face 
of today's problems. The editors of Fortune magazine have written a 
respectful yet searching and thought provoking indictment of the 
church's failure to lead the nation in spiritual things.

    Indeed, the pastors are not talking about the soul at all, they are 
talking about the flesh ... So long as the church pretends, or assumes 
to preach, absolute values, but actually preaches relative and secondary 
values, it will hasten this process of disintegration. We are asked to 
turn to the church for our enlightenment, but when we do so we find that 
the voice of the church is not inspired ... There is only one way out of 
the spiral. The way out is the sound of a voice, not our voice, but a 
voice coming from something not ourselves, in the existence of which we 
cannot disbelieve.[1]

The businessmen of this nation realize that even the economic and 
political welfare of America rests upon spiritual values, and that this 
spiritual leadership must be based upon absolute standards. The 
deplorable state of the church makes the church unable to answer this 
challenge in any effective way, because modernism, which is a religion 
of man and which speaks the voice of man, is in control. It is 
encouraging to those ministers who have been making this diagnosis of 
the church to find such corroboration among laymen.

What can be done about this condition in the Protestant church? Is one 
to believe that the situation is hopeless and beyond recovery? Some may 
have gathered the impression from the foregoing description that 
complete pessimism and despair must reign. Not at all! Some very 
definite and constructive steps can be taken which will help 
tremendously to alleviate the deplorable state of the church and bring 
it back to its place of power and usefulness in the life of America.

In the first place, one must have an historical perspective regarding 
the church and its various periods of spiritual apostasy and spiritual 
power before one can arrive at the proper solution to the present 
lamentable state. Such a long-range view not only will give a better 
understanding of the existing condition, but will also reveal what the 
church did in the past to recapture its power and God-given commission.

The low spiritual life of the Christian church today is not the first of 
its kind in history. In the middle ages the spiritual and moral 
corruption of the clergy and the doctrinal heresy which was being 
preached were like a plague which had struck the life of the church and 
its message. The immorality of the clergy was known to many, so that 
even the civil authorities were disgusted and called for a reform. The 
Roman church was selling indulgences, which people thought would take 
away the guilt of their sins. The total effect of the preaching gave the 
impression and the assurance that man must do penance and works of merit 
in order to inherit eternal life. Superstition, idolatry, and ignorance 
held sway to such an extent that it seemed as though the Christianity of 
the Bible would be forgotten and trampled under foot.

But God raised up prophets in that day—Luther, Zwingli, Melanchthon, 
Calvin, Knox, and others who called the people back to the God of the 
Bible. These men had been chosen and enlightened by the Spirit of God to 
preach the true gospel and to warn the people that all have sinned and 
come short of the glory of God, that none is righteous, no, not one, and 
that everyone needs the forgiveness of sin, not through the purchase of 
indulgences but through the sacrifice of the divine Son of God upon the 
cross. This salvation by the sovereign grace of God alone, apart from 
the works of man, was heralded by the reformers. The Bible was 
proclaimed the sole and final authority for faith and practice, the 
place where one can learn what he should believe about God, sin, and 
redemption. So rang out the preaching of those men of God. The 
Protestant Reformation revived the Christian church, returned it to its 
God-intended commission of preaching the gospel of the grace of God, and 
placed the church once more in a position of spiritual power and 
usefulness in the life of the nations.

Someone might object and say, "That situation was entirely different 
from the state of religion today. The attack on Christianity in this era 
is intellectual. No longer can one believe that the Bible is the Word of 
God and the authority for faith and practice, that one is saved from sin 
by the sacrifice of another, no matter how great he was. This is an age 
of reason, and Christianity is passé!"

To this every true believer in the Lord Jesus can reply with a strong 
denial. At the same time, if men still object and contend that the 
attack on Christianity today is new and more devastating, one can turn 
the minds of these to another period in the church's life when man was 
loud in his boast of learning.

The deists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, especially in 
England, also charged that men could no longer accept the Bible as the 
authority in religion, that human reason must be the determining factor. 
In fact, the deists went so far as to state that Christianity was 
founded on fiction. These men rejected revealed religion and fell back 
upon natural religion. Bishop Hoadly attacked the credibility of 
miracles; John Toland claimed that only what is rationally demonstrable 
is true; Matthew Tindal contended that man is thrown back upon reason as 
the basis for religion. These were the arguments of the intellectual 
enemies of Christianity in that day, and they are being repeated today.

The result of that attack of deism in the eighteenth century was the 
emergence of one of the classic periods of Christian apologetic. 
Sherlock, the bishop of London, wrote an able defense of the 
resurrection of Jesus Christ which, along with all other miracles, had 
been ridiculed as impossible by Woolston. George Berkeley defended 
Christianity from a philosophic point of view and maintained that 
Christian belief is necessary to reason, for without it one cannot 
explain the universe. Bishop Butler, in his Analogy of the Christian 
Religion, answered particularly the arguments of John Toland that only 
what is rationally demonstrable is true. Bishop Butler accepted the 
position of theism and then built up the whole system of Christianity, 
making his work one of the greatest apologetics of Christian history up 
to that time.[2]

In addition to this intellectual defense of Christianity, evangelists 
like Whitefield and the Wesleys called the church to repentance and 
faith in Jesus Christ. The great movement in England under the guidance 
of these men produced new consecration to the gospel and zeal to publish 
the good tidings of the grace of God. It seemed as though a new breath 
of spiritual life had been infused into the church and its influence on 
the life of the people increased.

The attack on the Bible and on Christianity as the revealed and final 
religion is basically the same today. Almost identical arguments are 
being used. The modern "higher critical" view of the Bible, on the other 
hand, has been developed largely since the eighteenth century, but it is 
based upon the assumption that religion is natural in its origin. The 
New Testament account of Christianity is said to be faulty and 
contradictory, a collection of data by ordinary men who added to the 
plain religion of Jesus. Christianity, argues the modernist, is the 
simple gospel of brotherly love and kindness preached and exemplified by 
Jesus Christ, not the supernatural religion set forth by Paul the 
apostle. He added dogmas like the virgin birth and the resurrection of 
Christ which he had borrowed from the mystery religions of the East. 
"Back to Jesus and his simple gospel of goodwill," say the modernists. 
In other words, if the naturalistic basis of religion is true, then the 
supernatural elements of the Bible must be explained away. The records 
are false and untrustworthy.

The philosophic and scientific assault upon Christianity today is also 
fundamentally the same. Christianity as preached by the church for 
nineteen centuries is unreasonable and intellectually unsound because 
its supernaturalism is not demonstrable. All of the investigations of 
thousands of scientists in many experiments have not produced one bit of 
evidence that God has ever entered the universe in a supernatural way. 
Consequently, the supernaturalism of the gospel must have been borrowed 
from older mythical religions or conjured up in the minds of the 
credulous apostles.

As in the eighteenth century and the other periods of the church's 
history when men have attacked Christianity, so today able apologists 
and defenders of the faith are arising. The scholarly treatise, The 
Origin of Paul's Religion, by J. Gresham Machen, refutes successfully 
the contention that Paul acquired his belief in the virgin birth, the 
Lord's Supper, the deity of Christ, and many other facts of Christianity 
from the mystery religions of the East. Dr. Machen proves that Paul's 
whole conception of Christianity, including these doctrines, he received 
from Jesus himself. No one, according to competent conservative 
scholars, has undermined Dr. Machen's cogent reasoning and arguments or 
disproved his thesis. Many others, like him, have taken up the defense 
of Christianity.

Scientists today are not as certain of the "assured results" of science 
as they were twenty years ago. The dogmatism in support of modern 
scientific theories is diminishing. Furthermore, has modern science 
destroyed the supernatural basis of Christianity simply because 
experimentation has not revealed any evidence of divine intervention? Is 
man the measure of all things? Are a few thousand or even a million 
experiments sufficient proof that God has not and does not interpose 
himself in the universe to accomplish his purposes? No believer in 
Christianity is opposed to science as such, because it helps man to 
understand the ways and the wonders of God in creation. It is the 
unproved theories of science which are the conclusions of insufficient 
and partial knowledge to which strenuous objections must be raised. It 
is the crass naturalistic assumptions of many scientists, which take 
into consideration only an interpretation of the facts which excludes 
God, which are most unfair to a full knowledge of the truth. Faith, 
which alone can understand the eternal spiritual things, is entirely 
discounted and ruled out of these calculations.

The distinction of modern science between natural truth and spiritual 
truth, which gives the impression that there are two sets of truth, is 
entirely false. God is the author of all truth, spiritual and natural, 
so that one cannot contradict the other. If natural truth is separated 
from the spiritual, then one will receive only a partial and a distorted 
knowledge of the facts. One cannot comprehend the natural without a 
proper conception of God. Intelligent Christians urge more searching, 
more experimentation, and more scrutiny, for Christianity thrives on the 
light, but let the scientist not claim that his assumptions of 
naturalism are proven facts.

Philosophically, the answer to the assaults on Christianity is somewhat 
different and reinforced today. Apologetes like Dr. Cornelius Van Til of 
Westminster Theological Seminary maintain that one must base the 
philosophy of Christianity upon a belief in a personal God and the 
revelation of himself in the Bible. Kant's Critique of Pure Reason has 
shown that the proofs for the existence of God from pure reason as 
historically stated are not conclusive. And even if they were conclusive 
they would only prove the existence of a finite God. Far better and far 
sounder is it to presuppose the personal God of the Scriptures and to 
argue from that impregnable base.

Others have joined with Dr. Van Til in defending historic Christianity 
philosophically, and in demonstrating that no fact of the universe can 
be fully and rightly understood except as that fact is related to God. 
Only in the light of divine revelation in the Bible can man properly 
know God and the world. Such is Christianity's answer to skeptical 
philosophers.

In the light of the attacks on Christianity, what must Protestantism do 
today? How can it once more assume its important and essential place in 
the life of the people? How can Christianity become the first concern of 
the individual?

The church today must do what it has done in ages past; it must call the 
people back to faith in the Son of God as the Savior of men and the only 
way to God, and direct their thoughts to the Bible as the only and final 
rule of faith and life. When this is done—and it must be done, for it is 
the only reasonable, and consistent view of life—then the church will 
regain its position of spiritual power, fulfill its divine commission of 
preaching the gospel of the grace of God, and become the means of 
restoring men and women to spiritual communion with God through Jesus 
Christ. The gospel is still the power of God unto salvation. It still 
has miraculous and divine efficacy to change the lives of men and women 
into saints of God. It still can make God the center of life from which 
all else radiates. And for those who by grace believe, it is doing that 
today.

The hope for this life and for the life to come is not the vitiated and 
emasculated gospel of modernism, but the gospel of genuine, supernatural 
Christianity. What possible comfort can a disillusioned, discouraged, or 
burdened man derive from the prattlings of this religion of modernism, 
which makes of God an impersonal something or suffused goodness? What 
assurance of salvation from sin and hope of life after death can it give 
a dying man, when it ridicules the atonement of Christ for sin and when 
it scoffs at personal immortality? This counterfeit gospel fails man at 
every point and in every crisis.

How different is the real gospel of Jesus Christ! To one who is burdened 
with trouble, Jesus pleads, "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden and I will give you rest" (Matt 11:28). To one who is 
conscious of his sin and transgression against God and man, he says, "I 
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance" (Mark 2:17). 
And, as one faces death or stands at the grave of a loved one, the Lord 
of Glory gives the assurance, "I am the resurrection and the life: he 
that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and 
whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die" (John 11:25-26). 
This gospel of grace meets man's every problem and sustains him in every 
crisis, even death itself.

And when one contemplates the state of society and civilization today, 
the failure and the futility of modernism become all the more apparent. 
The lawlessness of men and nations, the utter disregard for the higher 
values of life, the crumbling of the foundations of society, are due to 
the fact that men have rejected the infinite God of the Bible, the 
creator and sustainer of the universe, and have substituted for him a 
finite God of their own imaginings. Each man has become a law unto 
himself, each man does what is right in his own eyes. Nations have set 
up their own standards of right and wrong, and as a result there is 
moral chaos.

The Christianity of the Bible, on the other hand, condemns the 
lawlessness of men and nations as sin against a holy and righteous God. 
It proclaims absolute values of eternal worth and makes faith in God 
through Jesus Christ the foundation for every civilization. Only in such 
a gospel is there hope for this world.

God grant that a new and true intellectual renaissance will come, which 
will enable men to think straight and to begin that thinking with God. 
God hasten the day when this renaissance will be followed by a spiritual 
reformation which will revive his church and bring healing to the 
nations of the world. God grant that Protestants will see the true peril 
and realize the situation within their gates and thus be compelled to 
demand a return to genuine biblical Christianity on the part of the 
clergy and the church in its corporate testimony. When that takes place 
the Christian church will hold its rightful place in the world and will 
fulfill the command of the Lord, "Go ye therefore, and teach all 
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and 
of the Holy Ghost" (Matt 28:19).
