Chapter 14. Reform from Within

THE "reform from within" movement in the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
is based upon the belief that the church has a sound Confession of 
Faith, and although the courts, boards, and agencies of the church have 
been disloyal to the standards in many instances and are controlled by 
those who are out of agreement with the Confession, nevertheless, it is 
the duty of each minister and member to contend for the faith and to 
lead the church back to a place of faithfulness to the Bible. This is 
the position of men like the Rev. Samuel G. Craig, D.D., editor of 
Christianity Today, who wrote, "Reform is imperatively needed and every 
true Presbyterian should give himself for the task."[1]

When the members of the Independent Board were suspended from the 
ministry of the church and the Orthodox Presbyterian Church was formed, 
Dr. C. E. Macartney and others urged the ministers and members of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA not to leave the church. But at the same 
time they deplored the "severe treatment" meted out to men like Dr. 
Machen and the other members of the Independent Board and admitted that 
we "are convinced that doctrines not in accord with her [Presbyterian 
Church in the USA] standards are being tolerated and even fostered by 
boards and agencies of the church."[2]

They have maintained this position quite consistently, for they resigned 
from membership on the board of trustees of Westminster Theological 
Seminary and refused to support the Independent Board when it became 
evident that these two organizations would eventually lead to a 
separation from the Presbyterian Church in the USA. They have always 
been of the opinion that the church could be saved from modernism and 
that their duty was to fight from within.

On the other hand, some of those who renounced the jurisdiction of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA and formed the Orthodox Presbyterian 
Church argue that, although the doctrinal standards of the church, with 
the exception of the 1903 amendments, are sound, the decision of the 
1936 General Assembly sitting in its highest capacity as a court of 
Jesus Christ so interpreted the constitution in favor of modernism that 
the church is now apostate, at least until that decision is reversed. In 
addition, these men reason that the boards, agencies, and courts of the 
church are completely dominated by those who are out of accord with the 
doctrines of the church. And finally, says this group, the theological 
seminaries of the church, which are the source of ministerial supply, 
are not teaching the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, but employ 
professors who deny the very essentials of the Christian faith. What is 
more, the barriers against ministerial candidates from seminaries 
outside of the Presbyterian Church in the USA are mounting each year. 
With such a deplorable situation facing the church, what possible chance 
is there of effecting any real reform?

The question arises, "What are these advocates of 'reform from within' 
doing to alter the serious doctrinal defection in the church and to 
return it to the control of those who believe that the Bible is the Word 
of God?" The attempt to reform the Presbyterian Church in the USA from 
within became an organized movement when the Presbyterian League of 
Faith was launched in April, 1931.[3] The Rev. Walter D. Buchanan, D.D., 
had been accustomed to invite well-known conservative leaders of the 
church to New York City once every month or two for the purpose of 
discussing the present situation in the church and of laying plans for 
combating the advance of modernism. It was from this group that the 
launching of Westminster Theological Seminary received great impetus and 
support. The ministerial members of the board of trustees of the 
seminary were drawn largely from these men, and the churches represented 
became the largest contributors to the institution. The men who gathered 
in New York City at the invitation of Dr. Buchanan were the recognized 
leaders and contenders for the faith. Besides Dr. Buchanan, there were 
Dr. Machen, Dr. Frank H. Stevenson, Dr. C. E. Macartney, Dr. S. G. 
Craig, Dr. O. T. Allis, Dr. David Burrell, and many others, who later 
assumed a conspicuous place in the conflict.

The proposed union between the larger Presbyterian and Reformed bodies 
in the United States, which did not proceed further than a plan, revived 
the discussion of the Auburn Affirmation as evidence of theological 
impurity. It was at this time that the Rev. E. T. Thompson, D.D., 
professor of church history at Union Theological Seminary, Richmond, 
Virginia, felt compelled to discuss the subject, "Is the Northern Church 
Theologically Sound?"[4] in order to allay suspicions in the southern 
church. He pronounced the northern church sound and the suspicions of 
his brethren in the South as groundless. But his declaration fell on 
deaf ears because discussions continued, and the three leading papers in 
the southern church, The Presbyterian Standard, The Presbyterian of the 
South, and The Christian Observer, reprinted the Auburn Affirmation in 
substance, all of which helped to focus attention on the Auburn 
Affirmation.

Dr. Buchanan and the men meeting in New York City decided that they had 
too long neglected to organize an attack on the Auburn Affirmation, and 
that the need for united action on the part of the conservatives was 
urgent. Accordingly, the organization known as The League of Faith was 
launched in April, 1931, and a constitution adopted and signed by 150 
ministers, many of whom were among the best known in the church, and 
sent to every minister in the church. Eventually about twelve hundred 
ministers joined the League, a number approximately equivalent to the 
number of those who had signed the Auburn Affirmation.

The constitution states the objects of the League to be a maintenance of 
loyalty to the Bible and insistence, in opposition to the Affirmation, 
that the full truth of the Bible, the virgin birth of Christ, the 
substitutionary atonement, the bodily resurrection, and the miracles of 
Christ are essential doctrines of the Word of God.[5]

Meetings of the League were held several times each year, usually in New 
York City at the Broadway Presbyterian Church, of which Dr. Buchanan was 
pastor, for the purpose of Christian fellowship and discussions. But no 
real program of reform was ever adopted or executed. The outstanding 
struggle with modernism on the Board of Foreign Missions was carried on 
by individuals who were members of the League but in their capacity as 
individuals. Many of the League members helped in the conflict, but at 
no time did the League as an organization enter the struggle concerning 
foreign missions. In fact, most of the members of the League regarded it 
as a protest against the Auburn Affirmation and very little beyond that.

When the members of the Independent Board were suspended from the 
ministry of the Presbyterian Church in the USA and the Presbyterian 
Church of America was organized in 1936, the League was reorganized and 
continued by a group of ministers led by Dr. C. E. Macartney, who were 
imbued with the idea that the Presbyterian Church in the USA was still 
fundamentally sound.

At the invitation of Dr. Macartney a group of ministers and elders met 
in Pittsburgh on June 16, 1936, and adopted resolutions expressing their 
loyalty to the standards of the church, deploring the severe treatment 
meted out to members of the Independent Board, and designating 
Christianity Today and The Presbyterian as "channels for this militant 
testimony."[6]

On June 26, 1936, the Presbyterian League of Faith convened in the 
Broadway Presbyterian Church, New York City, elected Dr. Macartney as 
its president, and expressed a determination to fight from within the 
church for loyalty to the doctrinal standards.

The League met in Columbus, Ohio, on May 25th and 26th, 1937, at the 
time of the assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, and decided 
to wage a strong fight against a proposed revision of chapter XXIII of 
the Confession of Faith, which revision was being advocated by pacifists 
in the church in order to condemn war.[7] A testimony in general terms 
extolling the importance of remaining true to the Word of God was 
adopted and also the following paragraph opposing the proposed change in 
chapter XXIII of the Confession of Faith with reference to war:

    Therefore we deplore, and pledge ourselves to oppose the adoption by 
our Church of any measure or measures which would leave our nation 
defenseless in the midst of its foes, or which would give encouragement 
to those anti-Christian and anti-social movements and organizations who 
plot for the downfall of all that the Church of Christ holds sacred.[8]

This expressed determination to oppose any change in the Westminster 
Confession of Faith, which change would outlaw all wars as un-Christian 
and sinful, became the first specific project of the reorganized League 
of Faith to keep the Confession of Faith pure, and began the movement to 
reform the church from within.

The 1938 General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA had 
adopted the report of its special committee recommending that chapter 
XXIII, part of which reads,

    It is lawful for Christians to accept and execute the offices of a 
magistrate, when called thereunto: in the managing hereof, as they ought 
especially to maintain piety, justice, and peace, according to the 
wholesome laws of each commonwealth; so, for that end, they may lawfully 
now under the New Testament, wage war upon just and necessary occasions,

be changed to read in part,

    War wherever it appears, is a manifestation of the power of sin in 
the world. It defies the righteousness of God, disrupts His worldwide 
family, and outrages the human personality which Christ Jesus came to 
redeem. Even when war is waged with sincere purpose to restrain evil, it 
tends to produce greater evils than those against which it is directed. 
The Church, which is the body of Christ, set in the world to preach the 
Gospel of Peace, must ever bear witness to this character of war.[9]

In fact, a revision of the entire chapter was proposed.

In pursuance of the endeavor to resist this change in chapter XXIII of 
the Confession of Faith, an outstanding article entitled "The Christian 
Attitude Toward War," by Dr. Loraine Boettner, a layman, appeared in 
Christianity Today.[10] Dr. Boettner contended that the Bible does not 
condemn wars which are waged upon just and necessary grounds, and on 
certain occasions God actually commanded the Israelites to go into 
battle against the enemy. He included many other arguments against the 
proposed changes and concluded, "The proposed new amendment is 
unscriptural and treasonable."

Members of the Presbyterian League of Faith wrote articles and made 
speeches against the proposed amendment. But the opponents of the 
amendment were not confined to the members of the League nor to 
so-called conservatives. Outstanding modernists like the Rev. John A. 
MacCallum, D.D., a signer of the Auburn Affirmation, fought so 
strenuously against the amendment and against pacifism in general that 
he was asked to resign as editor of The Presbyterian Tribune, whose 
board of directors were committed to the amendment.[11] The Presbytery 
of Philadelphia, which is controlled by Auburn Affirmationists, voted 
against the amendment, while the supposedly conservative Presbytery of 
Northumberland voted for it.[12]

The amendment failed to receive the required vote of two-thirds of the 
presbyteries and so was lost, but in no sense of the word can the issue 
be regarded as a doctrinal one, since modernists and Bible-believers 
fought on the same side. The Confession of Faith was not altered, but 
the battle was not in this instance between Christianity and modernism.

Since the reorganization of the League in 1936, only one struggle has 
been fought, which was an out-and-out conflict between Christianity and 
modernism. It concerned the election of the Rev. E. G. Homrighausen as 
professor of religious education at Princeton Seminary, as well as the 
presence of Dr. Emil Brunner of Zurich, Switzerland, as guest professor 
at Princeton Theological Seminary. Dr. Homrighausen had been appointed a 
professor by the board of trustees of Princeton Seminary, but his 
appointment required the confirmation of the General Assembly of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, since Princeton is under its 
jurisdiction. Dr. Brunner had accepted the invitation of the board of 
trustees to occupy the chair of systematic theology made famous by the 
three Hodges—Charles, Archibald Alexander, and Casper Wistar.

Members of the League of Faith opposed most strenuously the election of 
Dr. Homrighausen and the presence of Dr. Brunner on the faculty at 
Princeton Seminary. Others, not members of the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA, also called attention to these two professors and their 
liberalism, indicating that Princeton Theological Seminary was no longer 
the citadel of orthodoxy, and that its reorganization in 1929 and the 
establishment of Westminster Theological Seminary the same year marked 
clearly the beginning of a trend toward modernism.

An issue of Christianity Today devoted considerable space to the 
reprinting of several articles by theologians outside of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, attacking the theological beliefs of 
these two professors.[13] One article was by Clarence Bouma of Calvin 
Seminary, and one by Cornelius Van Til of Westminster Theological 
Seminary, both of whom contended that Barthianism, which Dr. Brunner 
advocates, is directly contrary to the historic position of Calvinism 
and Christianity.

Professor Van Til pointed out that Dr. Brunner does not believe in the 
infallibility of the Bible nor even in the Scriptures as a trustworthy 
record of history. The view of history in the plain sense of the term is 
denied by Dr. Brunner and in its place he substitutes a new conception 
of history known as "supra history." Events like the bodily resurrection 
do not belong to history but to eternity. There must be a distinction 
between the dimension of becoming and that of history, according to 
Brunner. Such a distinction, said Dr. Van Til, destroys the real 
historical basis of Christianity.

In 1929 when Princeton Seminary was reorganized there were those who 
maintained that the conflict was administrative and personal, but Dr. 
Craig declared that with the coming of Dr. Homrighausen and Dr. Brunner 
no one could hold that the issue at Princeton was not one of doctrine.

    Since that event, however, a number of things have happened that 
would seem to indicate that the founders of Westminster Seminary were 
not far wrong when they maintained that a new Seminary was needed to 
carry on and perpetuate the policies and traditions of Princeton 
Theological Seminal as that institution existed prior to its 
reorganization by the General Assembly.[14]

Dr. Craig expressed the "hope that the Board of Trustees of Princeton 
Seminary would reconsider this whole matter."[15]

In subsequent issues of Christianity Today, Dr. Craig assailed the 
appointment of Dr. Brunner not only on the grounds established by Dr. 
Van Til and others, but because Dr. Brunner rejected infant baptism, the 
virgin birth, the Pauline authorship of the pastoral epistles, and 
because he maintained a wrong view of church and state. Dr. Brunner 
later denied these allegations, but Dr. Craig claimed that his 
contentions were corroborated by books and articles of Dr. 
Brunner's.[16]

In a letter to Dr. Craig professor Brunner stated, "I think it is no 
news that President MacKay whilst differing in some points from me has 
the intention of leading Princeton Seminary back to the real Reformation 
theology, the real Biblical theology of which Warfield's theology is a 
decided deviation."[17] Of this statement Dr. Craig made much, to 
indicate that the president of Princeton was intent on changing 
Princeton's historic position. The fight against Dr. Brunner's 
appointment as a professor never came to a conclusion because Dr. 
Brunner decided to return to Switzerland in 1939.

Dr. E. G. Homrighausen, who was appointed to the chair of Christian 
education, received considerable attention from Dr. Craig and others 
because he was regarded as an American exponent of Barthianism, and more 
expressly because of his view of the Bible as expressed in his book, 
Christianity in America. In this volume Dr. Homrighausen repudiated a 
belief in the full truthfulness of the Bible (p. 121) and contended that 
the gospel must be expressed in modern thought forms (p. 49).

With these facts in mind, Dr. Macartney and Dr. Craig appeared before 
the Standing Committee on Theological Seminaries of the 1938 General 
Assembly and argued against the confirmation of Dr. Homrighausen's 
appointment as professor of Christian education at Princeton Seminary. 
After hearing both sides the committee decided to take no action, so 
that the General Assembly had no opportunity to vote on the 
appointment.[18]

Between the time of the 1938 and 1939 General Assemblies of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, Dr. Homrighausen issued a declaration of 
his faith which seemed to prove that he had changed from a Barthian to a 
staunch believer in the Bible and Calvinism.[19] This declaration 
apparently satisfied Dr. Craig and members of the League of Faith that 
Dr. Homrighausen was orthodox. The objections to his professorship were 
dropped so that his appointment was confirmed at the 1939 General 
Assembly.[20]

However, Dr. Van Til contended that the many changes in professor 
Homrighausen's theology from an out-and-out modernism to Barthianism and 
finally to a mild evangelicalism, all within the space of a few years, 
was no guarantee of his Calvinism or of his fitness as professor at an 
institution which was committed to the Westminster Confession of Faith.

    Thus the latest pronouncements of Dr. Homrighausen are at best 
hopelessly confusing. His trumpet gives forth an uncertain sound. It is 
difficult to see how anyone so confused on the fundamental issues of 
theological thought can with clarity and conviction present the Reformed 
Faith to his students....

    But granted we could overlook his Barthianism—which is absolutely 
destructive of the notion of an infallible Bible—where is the evidence 
that Dr. Homrighausen has now adopted the Reformed Faith? It is not to 
be found in the Article on "Convictions," which the editor of The 
Presbyterian commended to the commissioners of the Assembly as evidence 
on the basis of which they might judge whether Dr. Homrighausen was a 
fit candidate for a professorship at Princeton Seminary.... It has not 
been customary in the past to appoint professors at Princeton who are 
merely "on the way" to becoming Reformed; of Dr. Homrighausen it cannot 
even be shown that he is "on the way."[21]

The struggle against Professor Homrighausen thus came to an end and he 
was officially installed in the chair of Christian education at 
Princeton Theological Seminary, October 10, 1939, giving further 
evidence of the lack of strict adherence to the Westminster Confession 
of Faith which the seminary is pledged to defend.

Up to the present time no other definite projects for reform have been 
undertaken by the "reform from within" group, except that of opposing 
the proposed union between the Presbyterian Church in the USA and the 
Protestant Episcopal Church.[22] The National Committee of the Ruling 
Elders Testimony issued its initial blast against the unfaithfulness of 
the boards and agencies of the church, but since then the organization 
has remained more or less inarticulate. With respect to the whole 
movement to reform the Presbyterian Church in the USA from within, the 
question might well be asked, What are the chances for success?

The answer to this question can be given quite positively: the chances 
for success are very poor indeed! This unequivocal reply is based upon 
two considerations: First, the "reform from within" group has no 
thorough-going plan to reform the church, nor is any program being 
actively promulgated. Secondly, the facts of church history are arrayed 
against the successful reform of an individual communion when once the 
ecclesiastical organization has come under the control and influence of 
modernists.

In the first place, there is no program of reform being pursued. The 
members of the League of Faith admit that the decision of the 1936 
General Assembly in suspending members of the Independent Board from the 
ministry of the Presbyterian Church in the USA was a wrong decision and 
a discredit to the church. Dr. Craig wrote,

    More might be said, but surely we have said enough to justify our 
characterization of the fifth anniversary of the 1934 mandate and 
accompanying "Studies of the Constitution" as an inglorious anniversary. 
It is not necessary to approve the organization of the Independent Board 
in order to maintain that for the good of the Church they ought to be 
rescinded or at least very considerably modified.[23]

Dr. Macartney likewise stated, "Indeed, in some instances, such as the 
tragic expulsion of that great theologian, Dr. J. Gresham Machen, our 
church has seemed to witness against its creed rather than for it."

Aside from these and other statements and articles, the League is doing 
nothing to have that decision rescinded. The Presbyterian way, according 
to its Form of Government, is to send up an overture or a memorial to 
the general assembly, urging the assembly to reverse its decision. Three 
years have intervened since the decision was rendered, but so far no 
such move has been made and there is little evidence that any will be 
made.

In addition, what is the League of Faith doing to reform the boards and 
agencies of the church which the League members have declared disloyal 
to the doctrinal standards of the church? No overtures have been made 
demanding that modernist literature be withdrawn, that only sound 
literature be distributed, that no compromising unions be made, that 
only those be elected to membership on the boards who will refuse to 
compromise with unbelief. No mass meetings are being held decrying the 
condition in the church and demanding its reform. Dr. J. A. MacCallum 
probably diagnosed the situation when he wrote,

    Fortunately, with the exception of one or two minor skirmishes, all 
is now quiet on the theological front. Of course we can never tell when 
the battle will break out again in all its ancient virulence but it 
looks as though we are in for an era of theological good-feeling. The 
conservatives are not so conservative, or at least not so militant, and 
the liberals are not so sure of themselves as they were a few years ago 
when Dr. Clarence Edward Macartney was the self-appointed knight of 
reaction. His occasional Cassandra calls may be as strident as ever but 
they have lost their sometime magic and in consequence his followers 
have been reduced to a weedy segment of their former battalions.[24]

The Presbyterian, which was designated as one of the two papers to help 
in the effort to reform the church, makes it quite apparent that Dr. 
MacCallum's judgment is not far wrong. That journal publishes articles 
written by men who are modernists, as well as Bible-believers. The 
September 29, 1938 issue contained an impressive comparison of the 
Auburn Affirmation with the standards of the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA in parallel columns. The purpose of this and previous articles was 
to demonstrate how contrary is the Auburn Affirmation to the doctrines 
of the church. In the same issue of the magazine there was an article, 
"God, Youth and America," written by the Rev. Jesse H. Baird, D.D., a 
signer of the Auburn Affirmation, which the editor praised as follows: 
"Dr. Baird of our San Francisco Theological Seminary, San Anselmo, 
California, delivered this masterful address on the spiritual history of 
America at the Area Christian Endeavor Convention in July, where ten 
Western states were represented." With such contradictory testimony 
appearing in the same issue of The Presbyterian, which was conscripted 
to contend for the faith and whose editor was a vice-president of the 
League of Faith, there seems to be little hope of reform. In fact, it 
reveals that a proper conception of reform is sadly lacking. What is 
more, the attitude of those who are leading the so-called movement for 
reform has changed since the 1936 debacle.

In 1923 Dr. Macartney wrote, "The third way to control the great 
defection is by protest and appeal and ecclesiastical procedure. But 
from this method many turn away."[25] Now there seems to be a tendency 
to forget the ecclesiastical situation as a whole, except for an 
occasional verbal or written blast against modernism, and to hold to the 
conviction that the situation is quite hopeless and that the most 
important task is to hold the fort in the local church by preaching the 
gospel. Dr. Macartney evidenced this attitude when he wrote recently, 
"Therefore, I value less the whole ecclesiastical structure, and feel 
that more and more for the true witness to the gospel and the Kingdom of 
God we must depend upon the particular local church, the individual 
minister and the individual Christian."[26]

In the second place, the facts of church history do not augur well for 
the present "reform from within" cause. There is not a single instance 
in all of church history where a "reform from within" group has been 
victorious when once the church has become doctrinally corrupt in its 
ecclesiastical organization. The most outstanding example of an attempt 
to reform a corrupt church, and the one which almost parallels the 
present movement, is that which occurred in the Netherlands.

In 1834 the Rev. Hendrik De Cock was suspended from the ministry of the 
Netherlands Reformed Church because he criticized modernism within the 
church, so that De Cock and his congregation at Ulrum formed the mother 
church for a new and truly Reformed church in the Netherlands.[27] 
Gradually others were suspended from the ministry for the same reason. 
But some ministers who were themselves doctrinally sound remained in the 
church to reform it and formed a society for that purpose. They gave 
three reasons for remaining within the national church: (1) their main 
purpose was to preach the gospel of salvation to the lost; (2) the 
national church was still capable of reform; (3) the methods of those 
who withdrew were wrong.

Many years later Abraham Kuyper, who was to become one of the greatest 
theologians of the Netherlands, was born of parents who were members of 
the national church. After he was converted from liberalism to a belief 
in the Bible he saw the need for a theological faculty true to the 
faith. Under his leadership the Free University of Amsterdam was 
organized, which has become one of the truly great centers of Christian 
learning in Europe. But the tyranny of the national church became 
greater and many saw the hopelessness of reform from within, so that 
they withdrew from the church. In 1892 this group united with the church 
organized by Hendrik De Cock to form the great Reformed Churches of the 
Netherlands. The "reform from within" movement had failed miserably, and 
today it is the free Reformed Churches of the Netherlands to which 
Bible-believers look for comfort and aid in the fight for the faith.

Reform from within the Presbyterian Church in the USA seems doomed to 
failure not only because of the two main considerations already 
discussed but also because there is not a single strictly orthodox 
seminary within the church. With this situation obtaining and with these 
leaders of reform mostly older men, from where are the Bible-believing 
ministers coming to fill their places and to carry on the conflicts? In 
addition, there is the painful truth that every year scores of modernist 
and doctrinally indifferent ministers are being added to the roll to 
lead the church to a more liberal position.

No one would rejoice more than the former ministers and members of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA who have formed the Orthodox Presbyterian 
Church, if the "reform from within" group should succeed in reversing 
the 1936 decisions against the Independent Board, in gaining control of 
the boards and agencies of the church, and in placing orthodox 
professors in the theological seminaries of the church. But this seems 
impossible, not only because the reform movement has no organized plan, 
but also because the history of the Christian church seems aligned 
against it. It is strongly suspected that history will repeat itself and 
that the League of Faith has set a hopeless task before itself.
